Orlando Sequera: Good morning. Good afternoon. Good evening. Welcome to Session Number 4. Welcome everyone. So we're getting there.
Orlando Sequera: We are going. We're ready to start.
Orlando Sequera: That for Number 4 we have great content to go over they as
Orlando Sequera: as usual.
Orlando Sequera: and let's start with some
Orlando Sequera: quick housekeeping.
Orlando Sequera: First of all, as you know, we're gonna have some breaks throughout the session. Approximately every hour
Orlando Sequera: we'll have
Orlando Sequera: a 10 min break.
Orlando Sequera: and then at the 3.5 h mark. We're going to have
Orlando Sequera: 1 h break, and then we'll come back for part 2
Orlando Sequera: in which we're also going to have
Orlando Sequera: a 10 min breaks until the end of the session.
Orlando Sequera: Please stay locked in for attendance purposes. Stay locked in during breaks, including the 1 h break.
Orlando Sequera: There are our mentors are going to be playing important videos that are going to help you with the vocabulary and additional information about the application. So please make sure
Orlando Sequera: that you are able to
Orlando Sequera: stay locked in. That is very important. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: all right.
Orlando Sequera: A little bit more about housekeeping by now. You should all be experts with this. If you are a percipient. User
Orlando Sequera: Go to Per Sepio. Make sure that you are in the right place. If you see here
Orlando Sequera: the by the right place, I mean that you selected the Pmp. Atp. That is the option for the current boot camp, and look for your Pm. Pretty much and professional 5 day cohort. That's what this type of class is it's the 5 day cohort.
Orlando Sequera: Make sure that you're in the right place, and you will be able to then go to the resources, Tab and all the resources are going to be there. Another important aspect that I want to mention. I know that some of you will like to do deeper Dives and some of the techniques and deeper dives, and some of the
Orlando Sequera: the actual definitions that we are covering.
Orlando Sequera: You can watch courses to have.
Orlando Sequera: You can click on watch, and you can watch videos that we have pre recorded for your class.
Orlando Sequera: There are some books that are available and
Orlando Sequera: okay, what we have here one research that I've been mentioning a lot. You have access to test prep under practice. Okay, you click on practice, and that's what's going to take you to test Prep. So you can take
Orlando Sequera: practice questions that are written by certified pmps that will help you to get ready for the exam.
Orlando Sequera: I know that he that I have. I've been doing my best to try to highlight the type of questions that you're going to be getting in your Pmp. Exam. I will continue
Orlando Sequera: doing that.
Orlando Sequera: But if you want to
Orlando Sequera: get an idea what type of questions and am I going to be getting in the Pmp. Exam. You have it already. Test, Prep. Go to test, prep, and take practice questions, and that will allow you
Orlando Sequera: to get exposed to that, and I know that the tests are like the Pmp. Exam a 100 and any questions, but you don't have to take them all. Take a few, and then, when you get ready when we cover all the content, and you feel that you're ready. Then get a baseline taking the full a 100 and any questions. But that's what's gonna get you an idea
Orlando Sequera: of the type of questions that you will be facing. Remember what I mentioned before. The exam is about critical thinking. Pmi once wants to know if you can apply this concept. If you can apply
Orlando Sequera: this definitions in scenarios, it's about application. There is not an exam. It it. It Questions are not about definitions. That's not what they're looking for, what they're looking for is, do you know how to use? Can you apply these tools and and definitions and concepts that we're covering to. So to to the wet to solve problems that's what we do as project managers to solve problems. You're going to be facing multiple problems
Orlando Sequera: challenges. I want to say problems, challenges. So
Orlando Sequera: can you address and solve those challenges? That's what they're looking for. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: all right.
Orlando Sequera: If you are not a procedure, user you have to go to Github to get the resources. Okay, and this is also a fall back plan. If you are a per CPU user and precipit that some work you can always go to Github, and that's going to help you to get the resources that you need for the class.
Orlando Sequera: You click on the link for the Pmp. 5 day cohort, and that's what's gonna take you to the materials that you need for
Orlando Sequera: if for this class all the materials that you need for this class. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: it's going to be there
Orlando Sequera: all right.
Orlando Sequera: Important aspect logging in with the correct name for attendance is your responsibility.
Orlando Sequera: If you're logging in from Percipio, make sure that you are logging with the right information and the same from any portal. And if you're joining through zoom, please make sure that you're using your first and last name.
Orlando Sequera: There is something that is in the Q. A. And it's also in the chat. If you, if you locked in
Orlando Sequera: A
Orlando Sequera: for the last 3 days with some information you do not have to test, do not have to check your name. Okay, it's it's already. It's it's going to be the same information. You do not need to do that. Okay, let's try to avoid duplication. Repetition with that that'll keep
Orlando Sequera: the Q a. Clean and
Orlando Sequera: free of clotter, so please You do not have to do that every single day. All right if you did it. You saw it. That is correct, and you're logging in the same way. You do not have to send a test message all right.
Orlando Sequera: and also please please review the chat.
Orlando Sequera: A Karl has been putting great information.
Orlando Sequera: A that will help you there's some great information. There's a message right now up there, if the chat is passed. But please check it, because there's some information there's a message in there that we would like you to review
Orlando Sequera: all right.
Orlando Sequera: and also in the Q. And a. We have answers to
Orlando Sequera: common questions that have been coming up throughout the last 3 days. Please
Orlando Sequera: sort Your Q. And a. By must up votes. Scroll up, and you're gonna see some important information about how to check your name, a. How to access your resources for both percipient and non-precipient users.
Orlando Sequera: and also information about the recordings that's also at the very top, and also information about the attendance tracker. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: so all of that is at the
Orlando Sequera: the very top.
Orlando Sequera: Let's continue with our
Orlando Sequera: housekeeping.
Orlando Sequera: If you have any issues staying connected. If you're having percipio issues or skills or skill port, please contact directly their customer support at support those skills of the.com forward, slash, boot camps. They will provide assistance
Orlando Sequera: if you
Orlando Sequera: we're disconnected for a few minutes during the session. You do not have to notify us that you have rejoined the sessions. Okay, those messages, the same as the tasks to confirm your name are going to be dismissed, and they're not going to have an answer.
Orlando Sequera: If you start getting a problems in a in a recurrent fashion with your audio or your video, not working. Please log in through Zoom. That will be my recommendation.
Orlando Sequera: Please log in through zoom, and that will help you to to address that, and then for the attendance tracker. Please read the instructions. The instructions are very simple, and what and the steps that you have to follow in order to keep track of your attendance. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: how can we participate in the Webinar
Orlando Sequera: Again, we are
Orlando Sequera: saving bandwidth by muting your mics and your
Orlando Sequera: cameras.
Orlando Sequera: You can participate in the chat whenever it's available it. But please make sure that the blue box is changed to everyone, and you can also use a mode.
Orlando Sequera: and using the chat versus the Qa. The chat is going to be on. That's
Orlando Sequera: throughout the class, so you can respond
Orlando Sequera: to some of my questions
Orlando Sequera: you can share preferred tools and techniques, so you can communicate with other participants. But if it starts getting disruptive, we are going to pass it. Okay, to minimize the disruptions that make this a better experience for you, and that's based on the feedback that we've been getting from.
Orlando Sequera: Most of you Questions do not go in the chat
Orlando Sequera: all right.
Orlando Sequera: The Q. A. If you have technical issues, please start by saying whether you are or specifying whether you are a percipient student or a non-precipient student
Orlando Sequera: and state.
Orlando Sequera: Be as specific as possible with your with the issue that you're experiencing. If you have questions about access in the course material. Remember that we have the information at the very top sort your questions by most of votes, and you're gonna find the information about resources at the very top.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: and also
Orlando Sequera: content questions. They go in the chat.
Orlando Sequera: I'm: sorry they go in the Q. A. Like same chat, my apologies
Orlando Sequera: content. Questions go in the Q. A. And vote vote on those questions.
Orlando Sequera: Click on the thumbs up, and that's gonna help you a.
Orlando Sequera: Those are the first questions that i'm going to be addressing again. We're going to have some stopping points during the session, which i'm going to spend some time going going over the questions, but i'm going to start with the ones that get the most vote. Those are the top questions.
Orlando Sequera: One thing that I want to point out one more time is that not every question is going to be answered. Unfortunately, i'm going to select the ones that are closely related to the topics that we are covering, and that will add value to the class and
Orlando Sequera: to your preparation for the Pmp. Exam. But, unfortunately, not every question is gonna be answered.
Orlando Sequera: and examples of break questions.
Orlando Sequera: those that are related to the course content what we are covering those are great questions questions that include topics that I, everyone will benefit from learning and
Orlando Sequera: questions that are not redone. Then just let's try to pay attention and to avoid duplication. So
Orlando Sequera: those are examples of great questions. All right.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: It's live attendance required. And the answer again is, Yes, this is coming from the
Orlando Sequera: Project Management Institute, not from skills.
Orlando Sequera: but of course we have some exceptional rules. You are allowed to miss one session if you make up the session by watching the replay. But if you may, if you miss more than 50 min at any time, including breaks
Orlando Sequera: beyond the set the one session allowed, you have to make it up by attending the live session in a different 5 day cohort.
Orlando Sequera: if you want to. If you want to have more information about your
Orlando Sequera: and about the availability of upcoming cohorts. Please review the boot camp calendar for skills off, and that is, you need to go to this URL to calendar.kilsoft.com
Orlando Sequera: all right
Orlando Sequera: in the event of an absence.
Orlando Sequera: please. you can ask. Request a replay by asking in the Q. And a.
Orlando Sequera: That's one way.
Orlando Sequera: or you can email the mentoring team directly. Admin friend at Kilsoft Dot. But please make sure that you provide
Orlando Sequera: the right information because we have multiple cohorts running simultaneously.
Orlando Sequera: Please provide information about the boot camp cohort. And here's an example for this 5 day Cohort
Orlando Sequera: the number of the session, and then the date and time, if I all possible New York time that's going to help
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to replace for study purposes.
Orlando Sequera: You attended every single session you met the the attendance criteria.
Orlando Sequera: But you would like to have access
Orlando Sequera: to the replace of the sessions for your study purposes. There's no limit in requesting this. Replace for your study purposes.
Orlando Sequera: All right.
Orlando Sequera: Okay. So let's go ahead and
Orlando Sequera: let's go ahead and continue with the
Orlando Sequera: last. Let's do a recap. I we are ready.
Orlando Sequera: Car Moly, and we have Dave
Orlando Sequera: as mentors, and we are ready to get started with today's content.
Orlando Sequera: All right. So this
Orlando Sequera: let's get started.
Okay.
Orlando Sequera: let's go over a recap of what we have covered so far
Orlando Sequera: in.
Orlando Sequera: We have covered. We started on day one talking about a business environment with lesson. One
Orlando Sequera: them
Orlando Sequera: on day 2 we talked about
Orlando Sequera: starting the project. What happens before the project I started, and then we briefly touch upon a
Orlando Sequera: planning the project Lesson number 3.
Orlando Sequera: So in planning this. That's where we are right now. We're going to wrap it up. We spend our day yesterday, covering multiple areas of your
Orlando Sequera: projects that are very important, regardless of the approach. Whether you're going with a predictive approach with an adaptive approach, or agile, or with a hybrid approach. These are key areas of any project that you have to address a separately
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: in detail. You have to address them in detail. They need a lot of coordination. There's a lot of plan
Orlando Sequera: happens in all these multiple areas.
Orlando Sequera: So we started.
Orlando Sequera: And and this is the reason why I know that some of you were asking. But do I have to go back and change the project. Charter. No.
Orlando Sequera: that is a snapshot with the information that we knew at the very beginning that we need it
Orlando Sequera: to be able to start working on the project. But this is where we're going to work on. We need to work with within our planning efforts. We need to start understanding the scope, and there's a reason why it was the first topic that we covered yesterday
Orlando Sequera: A that specific area of our project. This scope is King Scope is
Orlando Sequera: the foundation of any project.
Orlando Sequera: If you don't get this scope right.
Orlando Sequera: everything else is gonna
Orlando Sequera: It's gonna to crumble. Everything else is going to fall apart. Your your project is to to to, to to be to fail. Basically this is scope is really important. And within scope. We learned that the foundation of scope's so important that we have basically 2
Orlando Sequera: important aspects. We have the requirements for projects.
Orlando Sequera: We have the requirements. Okay, and the requirements are
Orlando Sequera: the foundation of the scope
Orlando Sequera: of any project. We need to do a a thorough job when it comes to gathering those requirements, understanding those requirements, because that's what we have to produce
Orlando Sequera: with our project work. We need to get a solid understanding. We need to get everyone aligned.
Orlando Sequera: and by that I mean the project team and the stakeholders will need to be aligned going in the same direction, because all everything else that we're going to build with our project, and by that I mean our schedule, our budget.
Orlando Sequera: our race management, our resource, planning
Orlando Sequera: our quality. Everything else is going to be built around the scope of our project. That's where we start. And again, regardless of the approach. Of course we covered.
Orlando Sequera: What? What? How do we do it in predictive If we're following a predictive approach.
Orlando Sequera: we learned that there are multiple
Orlando Sequera: ways, shapes, or forms of requirements that's, where we have
Orlando Sequera: technical requirements, functional requirements, non-functional requirements
Orlando Sequera: compliance requirements. We might even have project management requirements, stakeholder requirements. So it.
Orlando Sequera: if there's a pmo in place, there might be some requirements associated with the way projects are managed. So a plethora of requirements for predictive and we have to get.
Orlando Sequera: We have to be as thorough as possible when it comes to gathering those requirements. We have to use multiple
Orlando Sequera: requirement gathering techniques because the better we understand the scope the better we understand those requirements the better we're going to be able to build the scope, and they find the scope for a project, and that's going to translate to a
Orlando Sequera: it to increase the chances of being successful, so scope is the foundation of any project, and the foundation of the scope is going to be the requirements.
Orlando Sequera: We also learned that after understanding those requirements, and having a solid understanding. Then some of those requirements are going to make it
Orlando Sequera: to the scope of the project. Some of them are.
Orlando Sequera: Some of them are going to make it in to this. Go, think of the scope as a boundary. But some requirements are not, and not going to be in scope.
Orlando Sequera: Okay, some of them are going to be out of scope.
Orlando Sequera: Think of the scope as a boundary, and
Orlando Sequera: in essence the scope of the project is the work that we have to do in order to produce those requirements in the form of deliverables.
Orlando Sequera: We learned about a very important document that is going to help us to track the evolution of those requirements over time, and see how requirements
Orlando Sequera: evolved into the Liberals, and we use the requirements, traceability, matrix for that
Orlando Sequera: I know that it sounds like a lot of work, but you have to do that. That's gonna save you from a lot of headaches because it tracks the evolution, and it also helps you to show
Orlando Sequera: proof to your stakeholders, to your customers that
Orlando Sequera: what was built was based on their a. On their expectations, and we keep track of that over time with the requirements traceably matrix. It's a key. It's a key document that do. You have to work that you have to prepare as the project manager, and make sure that your
Orlando Sequera: team members help you and assist you with that preparation.
Orlando Sequera: Then we also learned that in predicted projects we have.
Orlando Sequera: When it comes to a structure, we have an artifact that helps, that is going to help us to
Orlando Sequera: manage the scope of our project. We talked about the war breakdown structure.
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: in essence, with a word, pricing structure. What we do is we now that we have this scope defined. We know what requirements are in scope. That's what we have to build. We know where we come into our out of scope. Okay, now, what do we do? Where do we start? How do we start understanding this?
Orlando Sequera: the scope of our of our of our project? So for that we use a work breakdown structure. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: that is basically applying the principle of dividing and conquering, dividing the scope into smaller chunk smaller areas that are going to help us to
Orlando Sequera: understand the different areas of the of the project that we need to tackle. So, for example, with building
Orlando Sequera: a one story house.
Orlando Sequera: we can divide this up. So okay, that's the product. We have to build a a one-story house.
Orlando Sequera: Let's divide the scope we have multiple errors. We might have this structure. We might have the foundation
Orlando Sequera: interior structure, exterior structure, and then the roof. Let's assume that it's an and then less landscaping 5 areas 8. So that's how we start breaking down the scope. This couple of then we can divide those areas into smaller chunks as well. So we start
Orlando Sequera: with the structure, for example, exterior structure, and then we have internal walls and external walls. Let's assume that that's that's another division subdivision that we're doing of the scope and then within
Orlando Sequera: that division. Let's break it down a little bit more to a lower level, and that's what's gonna Take us to a
Orlando Sequera: in this specific example.
Orlando Sequera: We have windows
Orlando Sequera: in the exterior walls and windows in the interior walls, for example, and that window is gonna be
Orlando Sequera: the lowest level for this particular example. That's what we call the board package.
Orlando Sequera: Always remember that we're packages. We use nouns for them we can have for the exterior walls. For example, we have. We can have windows, and we can have doors.
Orlando Sequera: Okay, those are examples of board packages. And what do we have under those 4 packages? We have actions that
Orlando Sequera: we have actions that we have to complete in order to deliver those 4 packages.
Orlando Sequera: Those actions are what we call project activities, and they, we use verbs to
Orlando Sequera: to denote those actions. For example, for windows we have to measure the window; we have to
Orlando Sequera: purchase the window or fabricate the window. So those are
Orlando Sequera: verbs. Those are actions install measure.
Orlando Sequera: We have to test the window. That's how we deliver the window. Okay, so that's how we can come up with the list of
Orlando Sequera: activities that we have to complete in our project. Remember, this is for predictive. I'm referring to predictive
Orlando Sequera: A,
Orlando Sequera: and that at that level of primarily, if you roll that up, that's how
Orlando Sequera: you can get us a thorough understanding of the scope of the work that you have to complete for your project. That's how you can come up
Orlando Sequera: with a list of activities that are going to help you
Orlando Sequera: with a list of activities that you have to complete
Orlando Sequera: for your project. Okay, that's the beauty of the word breakdown structure.
Orlando Sequera: That's predictive, then, for agile, for adaptive
Orlando Sequera: is a little bit different. This code in predictive is fixed. We have to define the scope.
Orlando Sequera: and we're going to create something that is called.
Orlando Sequera: They
Orlando Sequera: scope baseline. Okay for a project. And there are 3 elements. By the way, this this there's a description of the scope we call that scope statement.
Orlando Sequera: The second element is the actual work breakdown structure that I just mentioned. The third element is
Orlando Sequera: a dictionary that comes with that Wbs: because the Wbs by itself. You can put all that information if you show that to someone that is not
Orlando Sequera: even to a project team member. I have seen it happening. We need the corresponding key document that can explain to you. Okay, what is 1 point, 1 point, one. What do you mean by that? I I don't really understand, so that a that key document is going to be the Wbs dictionary. Those 3 elements are what we call
Orlando Sequera: this combine. They form the scope baseline. This is only going to be changing
Orlando Sequera: through change control process. Okay. But in agile the scope is not fixed, the scope is changing, and that's why we decided to go and use that approach. Okay, in situations that's going to be the best approach. So.
Orlando Sequera: for
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to requirements
Orlando Sequera: we look at requirements in a different way. We write a short description of the function
Orlando Sequera: from one perspective, which is the customer's perspective. That's how we write requirements in agile and
Orlando Sequera: the equivalent of the word breakdown structure in predictive
Orlando Sequera: in agile. It's going to be what we call the
Orlando Sequera: product backlog, which is a running to do list. It's a to-do list and what did you have in the to do list user stories.
Orlando Sequera: there were some questions yesterday, but what about technical a requirements in a major project? There are going to be technical requirements. How are those addressed? Well, that is, up to the team. The team is formed by experts. They are the ones that are going to break down those
Orlando Sequera: user stories into tasks.
Orlando Sequera: and they are the ones that are gonna manage as a self-organized and self-manage unit.
Orlando Sequera: All Those technical aspects are in and not just technical. There might be some other aspects involved with the work that they have to do. That's off to the team as a self-organizing, self self-managed unit in
Orlando Sequera: in in it. Oh, if we're following an agile approach, so we'd write requirements, using user stories. They only need to know the what.
Orlando Sequera: how we get there that's up to the team. So it's a little bit different from predictive. So keep that in mind that's how we manage requirements.
Orlando Sequera: That's how we manage the scope. And as your projects using the per backlog, and that to do list is going to be changing, some of those user stories are gonna drop from the list. So some some new user stories are going to be added. So it's always a changing a changing to do list. That's what the actual prot backlook is.
Orlando Sequera: Then we moved on. Once we have
Orlando Sequera: I'm gonna i'm gonna go back to predictive.
Orlando Sequera: Or once we have that list of activities that we created with our war breakdown structure. We have to start putting that together. Okay, Some things need to happen first. Some things need to happen later.
Orlando Sequera: So so you don't You don't want to be like me. You don't want to start building the house, starting with a roof. Let's put the roof together, and then we'll build everything else
Orlando Sequera: when you don't know anything about construction. So no, you want to make the best use of your resources. You want to be as efficient as possible. So there's gonna be a logical sequence that we can follow in order to a work with our a with our list of activities. So that's where we talked about dependencies that were.
Orlando Sequera: we started building our network diagrams. Some activities can start
Orlando Sequera: need to happen first with the house. Probably you start with a foundation right working with it from building the foundation of the house, and then you build the structure, and eventually you get to the roof. Of course there's way much more than that that needs to happen. But
Orlando Sequera: we need to understand that logical sequence working with your team members with the team members that are the subject matter experts. They can
Orlando Sequera: guide you through that process. But you start connecting those activities, E: following a logical sequence, and you build your network diagram, and then you have to identify something that
Orlando Sequera: is really important. We start, we have to identify. We have to estimate the duration of those activities. How long is it going to take? That's part of the schedule? And we also have to
Orlando Sequera: a Well, that's an estimation process.
Orlando Sequera: We said that that's done through
Orlando Sequera: it's an approximation that that duration should be ideally done by the people doing the work, even in predictive in agile, is non-negotiable in agile
Orlando Sequera: people are doing the work. They are the ones doing the estimation. And we start putting together those network diagrams connecting all of our activities, and we have to be able to determine the critical path
Orlando Sequera: we're going to. The connection is gonna happen connecting them with arrows. And we we're gonna have multiple paths in our network diagram. But we have to be able to identify the critical path which is the longest path.
Orlando Sequera: and it's gonna tell us the shortest amount of time that is going to take us to complete our project. That's the beauty of the critical path. So when you get asked by your stakeholders so great, how long is it going to take to to complete this project? Well.
Orlando Sequera: Mr. Mrs. Stakeholder, it's going to take 12 weeks. It's going to take 13 weeks. It's going to take 6 months, etc., right?
Orlando Sequera: So
Orlando Sequera: by doing that you have been able to identify also those activities that cannot be delayed. Any activity that is part of the trick or path
Orlando Sequera: cannot be delayed, because if they are delayed.
Orlando Sequera: then your entire project is going to be delayed. So you have to safeguard. You have to protect those activities from being delayed. Those are that part of your job as a project manager. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: Then we also talked about the importance of
Orlando Sequera: at resources. We're gonna have resources assigned to those activities to be completed. But we need to understand resource, availability that is done through negotiation and remember that we have competing priorities. We have competing
Orlando Sequera: projects. We have operations, and at least the same pool of resources. So you have to go through negotiations. You have to know when those resources are available, and by resources I mean
Orlando Sequera: not only
Orlando Sequera: human resources, but also
Orlando Sequera: equipment materials and supplies. Okay, so you got to take that into account when those reasons are available. So when you're doing your planning, gotta make sure that you look at resource calendars to understand when those resources are available and go through negotiation because you don't want to put information you don't want to assign. For example, we need a 3D printer
Orlando Sequera: to produce a some, a 3D models of what we're doing in what we need to do in a project when that 3D printer is being used by a different projecting, for example, or you don't want to schedule an activity to be completed by Re. By John Smith.
Orlando Sequera: A. A. Dba, for example, a database architect, Gwen John Smith, is out on vacation.
Orlando Sequera: It to do. You need to coordinate, or when he's working on 2 other projects? So that's that's part of the planning effort that we have to do with our
Orlando Sequera: resources. One thing that I that I didn't mention. I was scheduled that we covered yesterday. Can you optimize your schedule? The answer is, yes, you can do it from 2 perspective.
Orlando Sequera: The first one is from the resource perspective you can use.
Orlando Sequera: and you can use resource moving to make sure that you're making the best use of your resources that you're not over working people. Yes, this is going to take 6 months to complete. But as long as we work
Orlando Sequera: 80 h a week, for example.
Orlando Sequera: that's not what you have to level that and then smoothing, making sure that you're making that that in some weeks you're not over working people in similar weeks you were only working 10 h, so that is also really important for you to take into account. Use those techniques so you can improve and optimize your schedule as well.
Orlando Sequera: Using compression techniques.
Orlando Sequera: You can
Orlando Sequera: and use fast tracking, for example, that's one way. And it's basically doing things activities that you normally will do in in a following a sequence.
Orlando Sequera: You do them in parallel. That's one way of doing it. A examples of that
Orlando Sequera: f one nascar. They do it all the time when in at the pit stop. There's a lot of things that are happening
Orlando Sequera: at the same time, so it is possible to do it. And not only mask, or if I want F one. It happens in some products it's possible to do it some activities, and the goal is to short, If you're asked to shorten the schedule to compress the schedule. That's one way. But there are some drawbacks with that that can have an impact in quality.
Orlando Sequera: Other than those people that work at at f one, and and the nascar, for example, I wouldn't. I wouldn't get a bunch of Irish people to be working at a pit. Stop! That will be a disaster. I wouldn't even try that, myself. There's a lot of training, because otherwise quality came.
Orlando Sequera: It's going to suffer. You're gonna have a lot of rework, a lot of defects. It can. It can be a disaster, right? So in most cases, that's a true statement. But we have to evaluate on a case by case some cases that's gonna work. But
Orlando Sequera: it is an option that we have. Is it going to work every single in every single situation. The answer is, No; but it is an option. The second option that we have to make it better is what we call
Orlando Sequera: a crashing, which is having a users to adding more
Orlando Sequera: people to those activities that are part of the critical path. To shorten the duration.
Orlando Sequera: It's not always a silver bullet, either. It's not always an answer. It has it. It's gonna have an impact on your
Orlando Sequera: A on your project. It's going to increase the budget. You're going to have to pay over time or spend more on hiring more people. So it's going to have an impact on your project and you have to take multiple variables. It works for some activities.
Orlando Sequera: but it's not a silver bullet, either, contrary to popular belief that some people in upper management tend to think. Okay, so we talked about that and resources, and we ended up talking about the budget of our project, and
Orlando Sequera: we need to understand the cost. We have to estimate the cost of those activities. When we put them together, we need to understand how much is going to cost, and we have to aggregate those costs.
Orlando Sequera: Then we also need to take into account.
Orlando Sequera: and when it comes to budget after we aggregate the cost, the individual costs of activities
Orlando Sequera: we have to take into account also
Orlando Sequera: A.
Orlando Sequera: We need to have some buffers. We need to have some preserves
Orlando Sequera: to address any risks that could materialize in our project, and we call that a contingency reserve. So if you add your
Orlando Sequera: cost, you you aggregated cost, plus your continuous to reserve, then you have
Orlando Sequera: your cost based length. That's what your cost based on is going to be.
Orlando Sequera: But if you really want to know your overall project.
Orlando Sequera: you have to add another type of reserve that we call management reserve. Those reserves are used to address
Orlando Sequera: risks that were not identified for our project. And today we're going to talk about risks, and this is going to make a little bit more sense. What do you mean by identified race? We should be able to identify every single risk for a project.
Orlando Sequera: We're gonna talk about that. We should do a thorough job when it comes to risk notification, but is simply not possible. And we're going to go over that.
Orlando Sequera: and we need to be ready even for the unknown. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: And if you add the management reserve, plus your
Orlando Sequera: cost baseline. That's how you can have your overall
Orlando Sequera: project budget, also known as budget like completion, as we're going to find in when we cover and value management.
Orlando Sequera: and that sets the tone. And we also talked about procurement
Orlando Sequera: and contracts, a different kind of contract that we have for both.
Orlando Sequera: A. If we're following a predictive approach.
Orlando Sequera: we talked about the contracts costs reimburseable. We talked about fixed price and the different flavors.
Orlando Sequera: 3 in custom, first of all 3 different flavors in a fixed price, and then the hybrid, which is time and materials, and we also talked about, Mention a at least briefly the different contracts that you have. If you're following an agile approach.
Orlando Sequera: Another important aspect about procurement is that remember that you're going to be working with other departments when it comes to procurement you're working with your procurement department, and you're also working with the legal department. They're the ones that are drafting the contract, not you. So you're working with all their people body with your projects, so you have to work with them
Orlando Sequera: in following the processes and following the guidelines
Orlando Sequera: in a nutshell. That's what we covered yesterday and today we're going to continue our journey.
Orlando Sequera: It
Orlando Sequera: cover in other areas. We're going to start with risks.
Orlando Sequera: Then we're going to move on to quality of our project.
Orlando Sequera: Then
Orlando Sequera: another important area, which is everything comes together. We keep saying the project management plan this subsidiary plans, and for every a area that we have mentioned, we have said that we gotta have a plan and scope is so important that we have 2 plans. We have requirements, management plan as Co. Management plan
Orlando Sequera: that should give you an an indication on how important scope is that we have 2 plans to minute scope. So we have one for schedule, one for procurement, one for resources, one for budget. But they all got to come together, and that area is what we call integration. That's how we can develop our
Orlando Sequera: overall project management plan, which is a compilation of those subsidiary plans.
Orlando Sequera: Then we're going to move on to
Orlando Sequera: another
Orlando Sequera: another lesson that's on Number 4, and we're going to start
Orlando Sequera: focusing on the team. That is important for the exam. We're gonna we're gonna talk about leadership.
Orlando Sequera: We're gonna talk about creating a collaborative project team environment super important. It's gonna be more on the a human resource aspect and working with the team leadership. We're going to shift gears from process to working with the team
Orlando Sequera: how to empower the team supporting team member performance.
Orlando Sequera: how to communicate and collaborate with stakeholders, which we mentioned briefly on day one. But we're going to continue reinforcing that message of this important. Then we're going to talk about developing those resources, training, coaching, and mentoring in one topic that is super important. We're going to wrap up
Orlando Sequera: our session today with conflict management super important for the exam. That's something. But remember everything. If it's here, it is important. For the example, i'm going to try to highlight
Orlando Sequera: a those topics that are
Orlando Sequera: definitely super testable that chances are that you're gonna find in your Pmp extent.
Orlando Sequera: So, without any further due. We're gonna get started.
Orlando Sequera: and before
Orlando Sequera: before we get started I would like to review
Orlando Sequera: the Q. And a.
Orlando Sequera: For any content related questions.
Orlando Sequera: There is one question at the top in a situation where the effort initially estimated in the Wbs is not reflecting the complexity of the scope.
Orlando Sequera: Once the project has started. How did you adjust great question? Great question that happens. That happens.
Orlando Sequera: Remember that we're creating the Wbs with what we know. But more information can
Orlando Sequera: come up. So the answer to that question is
Orlando Sequera: we
Orlando Sequera: we'll have to create a change request
Orlando Sequera: to incorporate aspects of the scope that we're not taking into account. So the answer, the short answer is, You can do that. You can solve that situation through a change control process. So a change request has to be created. We missed this portions of the scope. We missed this in the scope.
Orlando Sequera: This has to be added, then that's going to get routed to the
Orlando Sequera: but that is going to evaluate the impact of that change.
Orlando Sequera: It could be add in scope, or it could be removing scope, and they're going to make a determination based on the impact and the impact to what they impact to the schedule, the impact to the budget, the impact to the scope, and they're going to make a determination. Okay, that's how you address that situation following the change control process. That's a change that will be a change. And it happens all the time.
Orlando Sequera: Another question in the Q. A crashing increase cost usually. Yes, because crashing means adding more people to work on an activity. So there is a there's going to be a cost associated with that, even if it's a using over time. So yes, usually it increases the cost.
Orlando Sequera: So the answer is, yes.
Orlando Sequera: Well, there's another question. When we discuss in the Budget estimation yesterday, on slide 1 15, there were 3 methods of estimating. One was analogous
Orlando Sequera: which will produce that rough
Orlando Sequera: magnitude. There were 2 others. Do you have parametric, and you have bottom up estimated which is the most accurate one. With make sure
Orlando Sequera: review that.
Orlando Sequera: And yesterday's session
Orlando Sequera: who defines the scope. It's a collaborative. It's a
Orlando Sequera: it's a. It's the product of working the project team members working with the stakeholders and getting to an agreement.
Orlando Sequera: So it's a
Orlando Sequera: it's a collaborative effort to define the scope. But you gotta get sign off from
Orlando Sequera: a people, but it's not just the project manager you're gonna get. They buy in from the stakeholders. Remember that you're building that for the stakeholders. So they have to agree
Orlando Sequera: A:
Orlando Sequera: they have to be on the same page.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: Another question. Technical requirements can be documented as a user story or a task in a user story. Okay, not what is documented in the user stories. The description of the functionality told from the perspective
Orlando Sequera: customer technical requirements. So the team is gonna work on that, and they're the ones that
Orlando Sequera: the user story into tasks.
Orlando Sequera: Okay, the only one to need to know they have they? What what is it that you're looking for.
Orlando Sequera: Mr. Customer. That's what they need to know.
Orlando Sequera: All right.
Orlando Sequera: we're gonna get started.
Orlando Sequera: We're gonna continue with the classes. We with the class. All right. So let's get started. We have a lot to cover.
Orlando Sequera: and we'll come back to questions a little bit later.
Orlando Sequera: and we're going to start with a very important topic. I would like to
Orlando Sequera: a half your
Orlando Sequera: attention. This is an important topic for the exam risks.
Orlando Sequera: This is gonna cover
Orlando Sequera: things that can go wrong in a project. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: and uncertainties.
Orlando Sequera: So
Orlando Sequera: a risk is.
Orlando Sequera: and not only things that can go wrong, you know it's also things that that can go well. So that's a common misconception. Most people tend to associate, risk
Orlando Sequera: a with a negative
Orlando Sequera: aspect, or give risk, and never a negative connotation. But risk
Orlando Sequera: can be positive as well.
Orlando Sequera: So we can have negative risks.
Orlando Sequera: And, by the way, we called those threats.
Orlando Sequera: but we can also have positive risks, and we call those opportunities
Orlando Sequera: emissions.
Orlando Sequera: A risk is a type of uncertainty.
Orlando Sequera: Pay attention. A risk is a type of uncertainty, something that may or may not happen in our project may or may not happen in our project.
Orlando Sequera: You might be wondering, oh.
Orlando Sequera: what about issues are issues the same as risks? The answer is, No.
Orlando Sequera: an issue is a negative risk
Orlando Sequera: that came to fruition.
Orlando Sequera: Okay, this no longer an uncertainty, An issue is at risk
Orlando Sequera: that materialized a risk that happened. We have to address it. It's no longer an uncertain may or may not happen. That's a risk.
Orlando Sequera: If it happened, it becomes an issue, and you have to act.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: So
Orlando Sequera: risk can come in any way, shape or form. Risk can come out of nowhere in
Orlando Sequera: from any of of the of the area. The project areas any from anywhere. Basically so that's why, when we get to risk notification, we're going to see that that that's also a team sport. It's not just up to the product manager. It's not up just up to the project team.
Orlando Sequera: Everyone is going to be in charge of risk identification tasks. Why is that because risk can come in any way, shape or form, and usually one aspect that is important that is shown here to understand is that
Orlando Sequera: risks
Orlando Sequera: are the result of a trigger condition. I'm. Going to give you an example that is widely popular for those of you here in the Us. And those of you that are not in the Us. Can relate to this.
Orlando Sequera: because it happens every single year
Orlando Sequera: hurricanes.
Orlando Sequera: hurricane season for those of you that are
Orlando Sequera: that have been in the Florida area hurricane season every year is
Orlando Sequera: we got to pay attention to what happens in the Atlantic Ocean
Orlando Sequera: in
Orlando Sequera: many people tend to tend to say that. Oh, there's a risk of hurricane in hurricanes in Florida that's not really the risk
Orlando Sequera: Let's Assume that we're working on a construction project
Orlando Sequera: and we're building a one-story house in South Florida, for example.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: And the trigger condition for the risk
Orlando Sequera: there. Are minute risks associated with the weather. Right? That will be a one category of risks that we will have to evaluate.
Orlando Sequera: But the hurricane itself is not the risk. The hurricane is the trigger condition.
Orlando Sequera: If we are working on identified risks for a project. The risks are risk of structural damage
Orlando Sequera: due to high speed wings associated with hurricane or the risk of flooding. Those are 2 examples of risks associated with a trigger condition. In this case
Orlando Sequera: the hurricane. Okay. So we have to
Orlando Sequera: pay attention to that. Understand what are the trigger conditions. And then
Orlando Sequera: what are the actual risks associated with that? A trigger condition
Orlando Sequera: going back to our example of the life center for
Orlando Sequera: shop industries.
Orlando Sequera: The project risks that we were able to identify with
Orlando Sequera: project, manager and fame that we see here in this slide, working with new vendors and building processes
Orlando Sequera: supply chain issues for correct bricks. And that's
Orlando Sequera: That's reality. Right now, with the global supply chain issues that we're experiencing
Orlando Sequera: building, code compliance, risk associated with that
Orlando Sequera: key stakeholder conflict.
Orlando Sequera: retail market changes decline of in store shopping. That's that's a risk also because of
Orlando Sequera: online retail, right in site survey shows risk of slippage from coastal erosion to
Orlando Sequera: in less than 25 years. So those are the risks that we were able to identify for our shop industries lifestyle center.
Orlando Sequera: Okay, so that
Orlando Sequera: in that list of
Orlando Sequera: project risk that has a name.
Orlando Sequera: we're gonna go over that in more detail. That's what we call this is a simple version of what we call at stake at a risk register, which is a list of risks that we have been able to identify for our projects.
Orlando Sequera: Then
Orlando Sequera: 1 one aspect that that we have to to take into account. What are the 2 aspects that we that we evaluate when it comes to risks? Most most organizations are going to to take this this same approach. That's what they look at.
Orlando Sequera: The 2 aspects that we evaluate when it comes to risks, are
Orlando Sequera: the likelihood or probability of occurrence.
Orlando Sequera: That's
Orlando Sequera: for starters.
Orlando Sequera: What is the likelihood of this risk coming to fruition.
Orlando Sequera: And then the impact of that risk
Orlando Sequera: in our project. So those are the 2 aspects that we, the criteria that we use to evaluate risks
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to
Orlando Sequera: a mostly
Orlando Sequera: the approach, is going to change within the lifecycle context. Whether we're going predictive or
Orlando Sequera: in in predictive approaches, risk is going to be managed and minimized
Orlando Sequera: when we talk about
Orlando Sequera: the risk responses that we have available. We're going to see that risk. Elimination is simply not possible.
Orlando Sequera: It is impossible to eliminate risk. That's not an option. We're always gonna have risks in our project, but we have to. We have to do as much as possible, to have to identify as many as possible and to have responses
Orlando Sequera: in place for those risks that we were able to identify. But eliminated risk is simply not possible. We can mitigate risk.
Orlando Sequera: We can reduce the probability and impact. But we cannot eliminate a risk. 100%.
Orlando Sequera: Okay, something to keep in mind
Orlando Sequera: A.
Orlando Sequera: When
Orlando Sequera: you might be wondering. So how do we do it in if we're following an adaptive approach.
Orlando Sequera: If we're following an agile approach, the nature of that type of life cycle working with shorter timeframes like 2 weeks, 3 weeks, 4 weeks per iteration. That gives you an a a Really.
Orlando Sequera: It's a a really good way, or really efficient way to mitigate risks that are
Orlando Sequera: that could be present in your project as early as possible. Okay, so that's one advantage that you have with. Add your projects. You want to address uncertainty as early as possible in your project, and the fact that you're working in shorter timeframes
Orlando Sequera: that is conducive to that. If we're following a predictive approach.
Orlando Sequera: You need to know more information.
Orlando Sequera: Ask you work in your project. So then, the level of uncertainty is going to start decreasing, as more information becomes available. So it's a little bit different. Not not so much at the beginning like we like we can do with an agile approach.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: a one aspect that is also important. Is that
Orlando Sequera: going back to the organizational culture and understanding your organization, you and and also the industry you need to know
Orlando Sequera: what type of a what is the risk strategy for the organization? Okay? And that goes along with the industry.
Orlando Sequera: For example, I can tell you from firsthand experience that NASA is risk adverse.
Orlando Sequera: NASA is risk of first anything, because human lives are at stake.
Orlando Sequera: So they are. The the risk. Appetite is low. They risk averse.
Orlando Sequera: But there are some other organizations in other industry.
Orlando Sequera: It's seeking when or miss issues are
Orlando Sequera: okay for profit, they are the risk. Appetite is higher.
Orlando Sequera: and you also need to know what is the risk threshold
Orlando Sequera: that the organization has
Orlando Sequera: in place. That is important for you to know. That's why, going back to what I mentioned before. It is so important for you
Orlando Sequera: to understand the organizational culture, because this is one aspect of that, and it's going to drive the way
Orlando Sequera: it it's gonna drive the way you have to manage risk and your project so the better. You understand that the chances are you're going to be more successful. So you need to understand that it takes time. That's why you need to rely on the Pmo. But you need to understand that. Have that situation and awareness that I call
Okay.
Orlando Sequera: And
Orlando Sequera: it is important, too.
Orlando Sequera: Define that. Your initial risk strategy. Take into account
Orlando Sequera: the complexity, the importance, the development approach that you're following
Orlando Sequera: A, and in your risk
Orlando Sequera: and your risk plan, you have to take into account that strategy what method you're going to follow? Who's going to be responsible for addressing those risk. You gotta take that into account. You need 2 things to address risk.
Orlando Sequera: You need money, and you need time. That's where the reserves come into play.
Orlando Sequera: The contingency reserves for those risks that we were able to identify, and also the management reserves for those risks that we were not able to identify. But nonetheless, you need time and money. You have to categorize those risks, group the ones that are
Orlando Sequera: a similar in nature together, so you can have a very visual and
Orlando Sequera: increase the chance of success when addressing those risks need to understand your stakeholder risk appetite.
Orlando Sequera: You have to define
Orlando Sequera: the risk, probability, or likelihood of occurrence and impact for the organization. We're going to go over some examples that can help us to do that. And
Orlando Sequera: the key, a artifact or or template, or document that is going to help us to define
Orlando Sequera: and classify a risk when it comes to
Orlando Sequera: probability and impact is what we call a probability and impact matrix.
Orlando Sequera: We also need to know how to report
Orlando Sequera: risks to our stakeholders. What are the formats that we need to use again if we have a Pmo in place that's going to be done using
Orlando Sequera: a the templates that are provided by the Pmo. But we still need to know
Orlando Sequera: how to do that. That is very important, because your
Orlando Sequera: stakeholders
Orlando Sequera: in your organization, any organization regardless of the industry they might not know anything about project management, but they are going to ask you
Orlando Sequera: 3 key questions.
Orlando Sequera: They're going to ask you.
Orlando Sequera: It's my project on time about the schedule.
Orlando Sequera: Is it ahead of schedule, or is it behind schedule? They know that
Orlando Sequera: they are going to ask you.
Orlando Sequera: It's my project on budget
Orlando Sequera: or over budget. They're gonna ask you that. And in those project status meetings
Orlando Sequera: that's what you can. Those are the questions that you're going to answer.
Orlando Sequera: Okay, that's why we're using all these tools to provide that information to them and to manage our projects. This is how we can manage our projects, and the third one is about risks.
Orlando Sequera: Are, are you? I see that
Orlando Sequera: there are new risk. A couple of risks came to fruition. There is a hurricane coming, and that's going to Trigger possible floating in that area. What are you doing to to address the the risk of floating
Orlando Sequera: or structural damage? What what is being done? Those are the questions that you're going to get. That's why this is so important. And then we need to be able to track this this documents we because they're going to be evolving that list of risks. The risk register is a living document. It means that it's going to be changing.
Orlando Sequera: Why is that? Because new risks are going to be coming up.
Orlando Sequera: We're going to be identified. Some risks are going to be addressed, and they need to be
Orlando Sequera: a documented as such. So that is, it's crucial that you keep your bricks register updated at all times
Orlando Sequera: when it comes going back to Agile
Orlando Sequera: when he come when he goes back to go going back to agile for and and risk management
Orlando Sequera: teams what they tend to do. And we see here our stacy model. We talked about it before, and we're taking with the Stacy model. We can use it to understand the uncertainty of requirements. And then the technology that we have available that can help us to place some of the
Orlando Sequera: we can. We can use this tool to place some of the use of stories and understand the risk associated with them. The team can understand whether we don't have the technology. And this this this is way. This is way too far from from what we can deliver is so. It's far from agreement.
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: is far from certainty if it's something that is
Orlando Sequera: in the category of chaotic, then a
Orlando Sequera: though that's something that needs to be addressed. The team has to go over planning and talk to the stakeholders and try to get everyone. Everyone's attention and try to address that as quickly as possible. So they.
Orlando Sequera: The bottom line here is that
Orlando Sequera: in agile we try to address risk as early on in the project. They make it part of their work. So it's not always developing new functionality. They work that it's been done in an iteration or spring
Orlando Sequera: teams. Try to address risk as much as possible, and they make it part of their work. It's part of the backlog work, so it's not just a developing new functionality. They go over this in their planning meetings, and they do use a risk register like we do in predictive.
Orlando Sequera: and they keep this information visible to everyone. Probably this is one difference between predictive and agile in the way that we communicate the state of
Orlando Sequera: current risks
Orlando Sequera: in predictive. We usually do that
Orlando Sequera: we have project status meetings, and that's one topic
Orlando Sequera: that is a cover during the product Times meeting with the stakeholders
Orlando Sequera: born in adaptive in agile. We don't have time for that we need to use other
Orlando Sequera: a other means other ways to provide that information in real time, and for that we use something that is an in something that we call information radiator.
Orlando Sequera: That is an artifact that allows us to. It's a graphic representation of the work that it's been done
Orlando Sequera: that has multiple columns, and one of those columns is going to be
Orlando Sequera: to risks in what's being done. So anyone
Orlando Sequera: the Camden Board, for example, that's an example of a information radiator, and you can. There are multiple tools out there like Jira, for example, you can create an information radiator, a Camden board, a dashboard that shows the status of the work and risk is one
Orlando Sequera: aspect of that. So anyone that would like to understand what's going on. They don't need to wait for for a styles report. They can look at it in real time.
Orlando Sequera: Okay, but we do address it in in
Orlando Sequera: in agile and predictive. It's super super super important.
Orlando Sequera: all right.
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to risk notification. So I mentioned before, this is a team sport. When it comes to risk identification for your project. It's not just you as the product manager. Of course you have to
Orlando Sequera: work on that.
Orlando Sequera: It's not just the team members. Of course they have to assist you. With that They're the subject matter experts. They can help you to identify race.
Orlando Sequera: You have to involve the stakeholders
Orlando Sequera: as well. They can help you to identify risk, and
Orlando Sequera: but at the Pm. You have to provide that awareness to your team members, to your stakeholders
Orlando Sequera: that it is important that if you see something, say something.
Orlando Sequera: speak up.
Orlando Sequera: help us to identify risks because they can come in any way, shape or form, and the more thorough we are, risk identification, the better is going to be for your project. So we have to provide that awareness, and not even just the stakeholders. Anyone within the organization, for that matter should be involved
Orlando Sequera: in risk identification. So see something, say something that is important. But the same way that we did with gathering requirements we should use multiple tools.
Orlando Sequera: One is brainstorming. Get everyone in the conference room or in a call in the zoom call and start working on a identifying brace. That's great. But you can. You also use
Orlando Sequera: A. As for analysis.
Orlando Sequera: that's also a risk notification technique. You evaluate
Orlando Sequera: strength and weaknesses, but you also identify at the bottom opportunities and threats. I'm. Going to impose the chat for a minute.
Orlando Sequera: What are opportunities and threats?
Orlando Sequera: We talked about that a few minutes ago
Orlando Sequera: by performing a sort of analysis. What are opportunities and threats, risks, positive risk and negative risk? Correct.
Orlando Sequera: Correct. So when you are performing
Orlando Sequera: as short analysis.
Orlando Sequera: You, i'm going to post the chat
Orlando Sequera: when you're performing a sort analysis. You are identifying risks.
Orlando Sequera: whether you knew it or not. But that's why we have it here as of race, identification or not. Then you can create an affinity diagram to put them together and let's go over some of them.
Orlando Sequera: The prom list. You want to get people to talk.
Orlando Sequera: A prom list is just a specific category, so you can get people to talk like
Orlando Sequera: pesto vuka categories. You want to get people to talk based, we risk can be environmental or legal, or could be technical, for example, multiple ways that you do that. But you want to get people to talk promly. It is a really good way.
Orlando Sequera: You can use affinity diagrams that is taking those brainstorming sessions to another level. Start grouping large numbers of ideas in this case of our race notification, so you can group them together to avoid duplication, and then you can start generating new ideas one
Orlando Sequera: another technique that you can use. And please remember this one, which is what we call a Delphi technique. You can send
Orlando Sequera: questioners and surveys
Orlando Sequera: to your stakeholders and team members. Because, remember what happened, what we, what we mentioned, that happens in a group setting
Orlando Sequera: You're going to have extroverts, and you're going to have introverts.
Orlando Sequera: Introverts might feel intimidated to provide their input in a group setting. But
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to requirements, and when it comes to risk identification. We want to get
Orlando Sequera: free ones. So that's why we use so many techniques to gather their input and what is that? They'll fight technique? This is a question that we're going to send. They can respond anonymously. They don't even have to give their name, but they can respond anonymously.
Orlando Sequera: and by doing that they're going to be able to provide, and the goal with the they'll find technique is to rich consensus about a risk.
Orlando Sequera: and you can send it as many times as possible. If you're if you have a if you haven't been able to reach consent to put it so, basically sending a questioner anonymously to gather that feedback. So multiple tools, multiple techniques that you can use
Orlando Sequera: to
Orlando Sequera: identified risk.
Okay.
Orlando Sequera: so super important. And then we have to review documentation.
Orlando Sequera: Then we have to
Orlando Sequera: go over the assumptions.
Orlando Sequera: Remember something that we take to be true without having evidence. We have to validate that because if our assumptions are not as accurate as possible.
Orlando Sequera: We're adding risk to our project. So we have to evaluate all of that, all of that
Orlando Sequera: in in some cases. And I the last bullet here about Monte Carlo simulation that is usually for larger organizations. NASA uses that that is complex. When we, when we talked about risk analysis
Orlando Sequera: following a quantitative approach.
Orlando Sequera: Those simulations, in some cases, when we're talking about a very, a lot of complexity, we use something that is called Monte Carlo simulation, to evaluate thousands of possible scenarios. That's what I use for, but it can help in. In some cases it helps to identify risks as possible, but it's not used normally in
Orlando Sequera: normal, in regular organization, in in most industries is not used
Orlando Sequera: all right.
Orlando Sequera: And
Orlando Sequera: the same way that we did with the work that we have to complete for a project our scope when we create the work breakdown structure. Here we're going to use the same principle. Okay, we have a risk. But we have to classify those risks into different areas.
Orlando Sequera: Same principle that we use with the war breakdown structure. For that we use what we call a risk, breakdown structure, or rbs, so we can categorize those risks, and then we can start
Orlando Sequera: making sure that we're covering them, the ones that we have
Orlando Sequera: that that we can
Orlando Sequera: the ones that we have to focus on. Do you see here, on level one, the different categories?
Orlando Sequera: And then it gets a little bit more specific as we go higher. This is, of course, one example. There are multiple templates out there for a race breakdown structure. If you want to get additional templates on that my recommendation, if you are a Pmi member.
Orlando Sequera: which I will strongly suggest you to become one. If you are not one already. You can go to project management.com, and there is a plethora of templates and tools in a in that URL Project management.
Orlando Sequera: all right.
Orlando Sequera: And now that takes us to measuring the assessment risk. But before that we're going to take our first break we're ready for a break.
Orlando Sequera: Let's take our first break. And when we come back we're gonna come. We're gonna.
Orlando Sequera: I want to address some of the questions that you might have.
Orlando Sequera: and we're going to continue with our
Orlando Sequera: with our class. All right, so
Orlando Sequera: enjoy your break.
Orlando Sequera: We'll be back in 10 min.
Orlando Sequera: I would like to address some of the questions
Orlando Sequera: that
Orlando Sequera: we have in the Q. And a.
Orlando Sequera: Before we continue
Orlando Sequera: All right. I see a couple of questions
Orlando Sequera: that are
Orlando Sequera: about positive risks.
Orlando Sequera: And
Orlando Sequera: basically, as I said before, organizations tend to focus on what can go wrong with the project right? What I mentioned with the hurricane.
Orlando Sequera: for example, then, that can have a negative impact on the project, and we will like to be ready for those negative risks that we called
Orlando Sequera: threats.
Orlando Sequera: But in many cases there are opportunities.
Orlando Sequera: positive risks, and it's becoming more and more prevalent.
Orlando Sequera: For example.
Orlando Sequera: we if you're working in a construction company and you start using a different type of material. I'm just talking about. Ha! Hy hypothetically speaking, and you start seeing that Wow! By using this type of
Orlando Sequera: paint
Orlando Sequera: we can not only not only reduce the cost is cheaper, and we can finish the the work, the the pain in jobs quicker than before than using the previous pain that we use. We see some opportunity there. So let's
Orlando Sequera: what let's analyze it, and let's try to see if this can be something, if if we can use it
Orlando Sequera: from this point on so new materials. For with different applications that happens a lot in construction or different ways, or by using this new tool, we can not only create if we're talking about software development, or we started using this tool, and we can generate reports, and it can help us with
Orlando Sequera: customer relationship management to Crm: we don't. Have. We have a separate Crm. Then there might be an opportunity there, a positive risk
Orlando Sequera: that we can
Orlando Sequera: that we can implement in the organization so, or in our project. We're talking about the context of our project. So those opportunities for positive risks
Orlando Sequera: you might not necessarily be looking for them. But
Orlando Sequera: you don't have to act on them. We're gonna when we talk about responses is going to become more evident. But there are opportunities same way that we have negative risk or threats. They are going to be. Opportunities and organizations are starting to shift
Orlando Sequera: from
Orlando Sequera: they
Orlando Sequera: traditional approach of only paying attention to the negative risks or threats, and being every in a reactive mode.
Orlando Sequera: and trying to be a also paying attention to possible opportunities because they can. These opportunities can can translate into reducing
Orlando Sequera: or saving saving money and time
Orlando Sequera: or increase in profit. So they're paying attention to those opportunities more and more, and
Orlando Sequera: a bottom line. There are more more organizations that are
Orlando Sequera: paying close attention or pharmaceutical companies in their studies, in the in their medical trials. When they're trying a new drug, they can find some interesting opportunities, and they can go after them. So those are possible positive risks. Okay. So it happens in multiple industries. You can might find a better way of doing things that can be replicated
Orlando Sequera: in the organization for other projects. It doesn't have to be a major breakthrough. It can be something as simple as following a different approach that can be replicated. That's an opportunity. So multiple of opportunities.
Orlando Sequera: Are they going to go after all of them? No, the answer is going to go back to the risk appetite and the risk threshold
Orlando Sequera: a that the organization has in place. But multiple of our trees
Orlando Sequera: more positive risks, a, of course, multiple negative risks or threats.
Orlando Sequera: Okay? So that answers
Orlando Sequera: the
Orlando Sequera: that answers that question.
Orlando Sequera: And
Orlando Sequera: okay, so that answers that question.
Orlando Sequera: Another question. Utilizing all these tools
Orlando Sequera: A. As a product manager to to navigate a product successfully. How long does it take to put together a solid for your plan? It depends on the project that's specific to the project, hey? The more complex your project is, and the key on the key is going to be in this scope. It depends on the complexity of the project.
Orlando Sequera: let's see what else we have
Orlando Sequera: business or systemic risk was not mentioned. That's another question to chat. Where is that type of risk? That might be a category. If that's important in your context in your organization, you have to a work on identifying those risks
Orlando Sequera: in the example of the new pain. Will the team also consider the risk of new materials to me? Expectation. But you wanna
Orlando Sequera: yes, that's it. It can go either way it can go either way.
Orlando Sequera: Sure answer is yes.
Orlando Sequera: Can you have
Orlando Sequera: just positive risks? Not just positive risk. Usually you have both in any project. You have pro positive risks and negative risks.
Orlando Sequera: Another question in the exam. Will we be required to a term predictor from Agile? The scenario question is going to give you some hints. It's not to be. It's not going to be straightforward. You have to read this. Another question to understand. Oh, is this referring to,
Orlando Sequera: and as an adaptive approach, or to a predictive approach, you have to be able to discern and
Orlando Sequera: understand, based on the information that is given to you. What type of scenario are they talking about?
Orlando Sequera: Okay, and
Orlando Sequera: can the positive risk become a threat?
Hmm.
Orlando Sequera: I'm not gonna say no. But usually that doesn't happen it's a positive risk.
Orlando Sequera: It could happen, but you have to identify positive risk and negative negative risk for your project. Don't. Overthink it at this point Don't overthink it.
Okay.
Orlando Sequera: all right, let's continue.
Orlando Sequera: But one also. One thing that I wanted to point out, and i'm surprised that it Hasn't come up in? The questions are all risk identified, and we said, No.
Orlando Sequera: Some risks, even though we use multiple techniques for risk identification. Not all. We're not going to be able to identify
Orlando Sequera: every single risk. And I'm going to use a real life example to explain that that is going to
Orlando Sequera: a
Orlando Sequera: that. It's gonna help you in understanding. We should be able to identify every single risk. I'm: so i'm i'm surprised that it didn't come up in the Q. A.
Orlando Sequera: But anyways.
Orlando Sequera: before we move on to step number 2, which is assessing risk.
Orlando Sequera: There are, it happens, all the time we are not going to be able to identify every single risk. I'm going to give you an example.
Orlando Sequera: This in 2,011.
Orlando Sequera: Some of you might remember. Some of you might not remember. But there was a major nuclear reactor disaster in Fukushima, Japan.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: And let me give you a little bit of context.
Orlando Sequera: Japan has
Orlando Sequera: due to the fact
Orlando Sequera: located in an area that is very prom to earthquakes. They have the strictest building code when it comes to new core plants
Orlando Sequera: because they are locating a region in the world that is very prone to earthquakes.
Orlando Sequera: earthquakes.
Orlando Sequera: The earthquake is not the risk. That is the trigger event. Okay, so
Orlando Sequera: they have the strictest building code
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to.
Orlando Sequera: and when it comes to building nuclear nuclear plants, Not even here in the States, not even Europe. They have the strictest building code.
Orlando Sequera: So when they build the Fukushima reactor plan.
Orlando Sequera: they were the Fukushima plan.
Orlando Sequera: They, of course, followed those guidelines, and they
Orlando Sequera: perform this risk.
Orlando Sequera: Identification process. This is a used in multiple industries, including that one.
Orlando Sequera: and they were able to
Orlando Sequera: identify one major risk due to the fact that they are
Orlando Sequera: in a in an area that is prone to earthquakes, losing power, the risk of losing power due to an earthquake. Right? That's a major risk. A major threat for any nuclear plant, because if the reactors lose power, then they're gonna overheat, and that's when we have
Orlando Sequera: a disaster.
Orlando Sequera: So they were able to identify that risk, of course, that wasn't the only one they were multiple risk. But that's the one that we're going to focus on. And they came up with that response. For that risk they they measure that risk
Orlando Sequera: which is what we're going to cover in a few minutes right now. In the next slide they measure the impact from both perspective, from the qualitative perspective, and also from the quantitative perspective, and they determine our response for that risk.
Orlando Sequera: since the probability of occurrence was high and the impact was high.
Orlando Sequera: They use mitigation as a response. We're going to cover the different responses that we have for risks.
Orlando Sequera: and the response was mitigation in this case, and
Orlando Sequera: it consisted of
Orlando Sequera: having back up
Orlando Sequera: backup power is that in the event of them losing power due to an earthquake, then this back up
Orlando Sequera: backup plans will provide power to the generators, so they could continue working
Orlando Sequera: when in 2,011,
Orlando Sequera: the earthquake that we, I think it was 9 in Richter scale, humongous.
Orlando Sequera: earthquake.
Orlando Sequera: very powerful
Orlando Sequera: they. The event unfortunately, occurred
Orlando Sequera: then.
Orlando Sequera: The risk mitigation in place worked
Orlando Sequera: properly.
Orlando Sequera: They lost power.
Orlando Sequera: Then the backup generators
Orlando Sequera: worked
Orlando Sequera: as intended.
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: they were able to provide continue to provide power to to to generators. But there was a risk that wasn't identified, unfortunately.
Orlando Sequera: and this risk on a daily 5
Orlando Sequera: West
Orlando Sequera: the risk of flooding due to a tsunami.
Orlando Sequera: That's what caused the problem. Unfortunately in the
Orlando Sequera: and they were not
Orlando Sequera: that risk? That risk was not in the risk register. They were not identified. They were not able to identify. But the fact that we're not able they were not able to identify, didn't mean that it didn't exist. It did exist, and it had all the consequences that we
Orlando Sequera: that we're very well aware of
Orlando Sequera: they.
Orlando Sequera: But the tsunami was the the trigger event, and flooding the reactors flooded, and they lost power due to that. And we know the consequences of that flooding. What happened. So that's what happened. Even in that case, when Japan had the strictest building code for
Orlando Sequera: a nuclear plant.
Orlando Sequera: they still had risks that were not a identified
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: disasters can happen. So it happens if we happen to them, it can happen to any industry. Can it any happens all the time. So we have to be very. We have to be cognizant, and we have to acknowledge the fact, the fact that even though we're doing
Orlando Sequera: as much as possible when it comes to risk and identification as we should, we have to come to a conclusion that there are going to be some risks
Orlando Sequera: out there that we're not going to be able to identify. But the fact that we were not able to identify them does not mean that they're not lurking out. There they are, and how can we address them by using the management reserves.
Orlando Sequera: management reserves, set amount of money, and a set of amount of time that will help us to address those unidentified risks. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: So when it comes to
Orlando Sequera: working with risks, now that we worked with
Orlando Sequera: step number one which is identifying risks and try to build
Orlando Sequera: a risk, register that list of risks
Orlando Sequera: as far as possible. Try to identify as many risk as possible. The second step, when it comes to re risk management is to analyze those Fr. We have to assess them.
Orlando Sequera: Okay. And the first type of assessment that we have to perform is what we call qualitative risk, analysis
Orlando Sequera: or qualitative assessment.
Orlando Sequera: And what we're trying to determine is because we have to prioritize this risks. Remember that we don't have unlimited resources. Yes.
Orlando Sequera: it. There are. Some say that a opportunity
Orlando Sequera: we can benefit from multiple opportunities, but
Orlando Sequera: we have to go back to the constraints of our project. We have limited resources. We have a set amount of money and a set amount of time to complete the work, and we have to per. That means that we have to prioritize
Orlando Sequera: that that is also applicable to risk. So we need to understand the 2 factors that we said that we study when it comes to risks. Those are probability and impact.
Orlando Sequera: Okay. And we start with a qualitative
Orlando Sequera: approach based on what based based on mainly the experience of a subject matter experts that is more of a subjective analysis that step number one. But then, after that we're going to perform a second type of analysis, which is what we call quantitative. We're going to use data.
Orlando Sequera: not just experience or expertise. We're gonna use data. So
Orlando Sequera: those are the 2 types of analysis that we're going to perform when it comes to a risk. Management
Orlando Sequera: in
Orlando Sequera: the goal is to understand. This is a an example of a probability impact matrix. The goal is to understand
Orlando Sequera: what is what are those risks that have a high probability and high impact for both
Orlando Sequera: opportunities and threats. Many organizations only focus on threats, but we have to before the exam. Remember, we have to look at it from the negative risk, perspective, or threat, but we also have to look at it from the positive risk or opportunity as well. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: But the goal is to understand, and we start to pray because we we have to rearrange
Orlando Sequera: that
Orlando Sequera: risk register the risks that have the high probability high impact. They need to go at the top. But we have to analyze them first and many organizations. This is just an example of a risk, probability and impact definition. To understand this can change from organization to organization. If you have a Pmo in place.
Orlando Sequera: that's gonna be your source to get this information. But organizations have this in place. They understand they have the scale of impact and probability, so you can use that accordingly. And what you're going to be using is
Orlando Sequera: you're going to be placing your risks
Orlando Sequera: in this probability and impact matrix. But in a subjective way, right? You're working mainly with your team members to be working. Who's going to be doing this? Mainly your. You can work with some stakeholders, but it's going to be mainly the subject matter experts. The people that are doing the work. They have face similar situations in the past. They can help you with this, but the goal is to understand. We have to prioritize. This is how we can rearrange that
Orlando Sequera: risk register to make sure that anything that has high probability and high impact. Anything in the red has to go at
Orlando Sequera: to the top of your risk register. Okay, that risk of floating in If we're building the one story house in South Florida and the risk of structural damage, those go to the top, because that's going to be a high probability every year. We have a hurricane season
Orlando Sequera: in South Florida. That's just a fact of life. And then the impact to the project to this construction project is high, so those are in the red. Anything in the red
Orlando Sequera: that has to go to the top of your a of your race register, and then you have medium risk that's going to be in in the middle section of your risk register, and then the ones that have a low, pretty, low impact. They're going at the bottom, you may. You might be wondering every single reason we should be able to address them.
Orlando Sequera: We have limited resources. That's why you have to prioritize. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: And this is an example of a race register. It's another spreadsheet.
Orlando Sequera: That's what you have
Orlando Sequera: with multiple columns. It's a list of risks, a running list of risks that has
Orlando Sequera: the description of the risk.
Orlando Sequera: the description of the possible impact. And this is just an example. These changes multiple templates out there.
Orlando Sequera: The impact score probability, this core that was assigned by the team.
Orlando Sequera: the trigger condition could be. what's going to be that event that could trigger this risk
Orlando Sequera: the plan response
Orlando Sequera: in an important piece of information. Every single risk in your risk register has to have
Orlando Sequera: a risk owner.
Orlando Sequera: Someone has to be assigned to a particular risk, because
Orlando Sequera: if that risk comes to fruition, and if we're talking about a negative risk, for example, and it comes to fruition. It needs to be addressed, meaning that the response that we identify
Orlando Sequera: has to be implemented, and there has to be an owner. Okay, this is super super super important. So all your risk. We only have 3 here. I wish I had that locking my projects, but it can be multiple. It can be depending on your project. You're going to have it's a it could be a long list, but you gotta make sure that you have
Orlando Sequera: a risk owner. That is an important piece of information. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: And we start that version one
Orlando Sequera: with your
Orlando Sequera: with your qualitative type of analysis. So we start rearranging, but it's subjective right. It's subjective.
Orlando Sequera: In addition to to the the
Orlando Sequera: the risk Register a imag on projects. We teams, as I mentioned before can add
Orlando Sequera: this information to a an information radiator. So it is available. Another column in the Information radiator with the risks that we're able that they were able to identify, so they can address that in the subsequent iterations. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: is some of the columns you can tailor this risk register it.
Orlando Sequera: The type of status that they the day that it wasn't open or identified the day that it was resolved. So you can. You can close risk if they come to Fr. On their address, you can close them. And and the resolution strategy that might help you with with with lessons learned in the future.
Orlando Sequera: Okay?
Orlando Sequera: And then the next type of analysis
Orlando Sequera: or assessment that we have to perform for risk is going to be quantitative.
Orlando Sequera: I'm gonna point out that not every single organization that every single industry performs a tie, a quantitative risk analysis. But for the purposes of the exam
Orlando Sequera: you have to assume that you're going to use both. You're going to use the qualitative risk assessment. Possibly some of you that are working pretty much right now
Orlando Sequera: have used the probability an impact matrix, and that's what you use. That's one way. Most organizations use that. But in some cases some industries they need a little bit more than just a subjective type of analysis. They need data.
Orlando Sequera: so
Orlando Sequera: industries like airspace and weather forecasting, they use
Orlando Sequera: a quantitative risk analysis.
Orlando Sequera: The Monte Carlo simulation is the classic example of
Orlando Sequera: one itator of risk analysis
Orlando Sequera: for those of you that like weather forecasting, for example.
Orlando Sequera: when a storm is coming, a hurricane is coming.
Orlando Sequera: We have this and this is something very common in in in in most places. You're watching the news at night, and you want to understand the possible path of the hurricane.
Orlando Sequera: Well, in order to determine the possible path, and then you start seeing something. They have to become more and more popular. Those spaghetti models that show a possible trajectory, and you see the the the European path is saying that it's the hurricane. It's going to go this way and that. You start seeing other
Orlando Sequera: possible paths. And it it is. It's pretty much like a spaghetti ball that you see the possible lines, and then they try to determine the cone of uncertainty for the hurricane. All of that is done using a Monte Carlo simulation that analyzes
Orlando Sequera: thousands of possible scenarios
Orlando Sequera: thousands. This needs to be done using computers specialized equipment. This is not done by hand. They analyze thousands of possible scenarios.
Orlando Sequera: That's how they're able to determine that kind of uncertainty for the hurricane based on the information that they have.
Orlando Sequera: Okay, this cannot be done by hand. Another example is
Orlando Sequera: airspace.
Orlando Sequera: This the spacecraft Orion for the art of this program was built and designed mainly by Lock it, Martin. They're the ones in charge of Orion. That is their a contribution main contribution
Orlando Sequera: to the a this program.
Orlando Sequera: and in order to build a spacecraft.
Orlando Sequera: they had to replicate conditions of outer space.
Orlando Sequera: and they can do that through simulation
Orlando Sequera: or this type of risk analysis to understand what happens. If the pressure changes, what happens is the temperature changes. What is going to be the impact on the spacecraft, so for that. They use complicated simulations and they use
Orlando Sequera: Hmm. A computer models to replicate those effects of outer space.
Orlando Sequera: In understand the impact of pressures and the impacts of changes in temperatures, etc. And multiple changes in different conditions. So for that they use simulations that's a type of
Orlando Sequera: quantitative risk analysis.
Orlando Sequera: All the industries that use this
Orlando Sequera: insurance. They also use it a lot, so they perform in the financial industry. They use it a lot as well. But You're trying to understand more when you need to understand multiple
Orlando Sequera: thousands of possible scenarios and try to determine the best they they most. the high probability high impact risks in this case do you use a quantitative type of analysis? Okay?
Orlando Sequera: And there other type of quantitative type of analysis. We see the tornado diagram which is comparing
Orlando Sequera: A.
Orlando Sequera: They relative importance. It can be a positive and negative
Orlando Sequera: for the different risks.
Orlando Sequera: A. Also, this is
Orlando Sequera: you have.
Orlando Sequera: the sensitivity, analysis, tornado, the tornado diagram that I just mentioned. So there are multiple a ways.
Orlando Sequera: sensitivity, analysis. You can determine
Orlando Sequera: which individual for the race or other sources have the most potential impact on product outcomes.
Orlando Sequera: And, as I mentioned before, we talked about the simulation, the Monte Carlo simulation classic example. If you ever see something in the exam about monicar simulation o
Orlando Sequera: quantitative risk analysis and simulation as well.
Orlando Sequera: Okay. So we analyze risk
Orlando Sequera: from 2 perspective.
Orlando Sequera: Let me go back one.
Orlando Sequera: Okay. And
Orlando Sequera: we also have 4 predictive projects. Remember, pay attention to the symbol. Here we have other tools. We have decision 3 analysis that's going to help us to make some decisions and evaluate multiple branches. We have influence diagrams, and we also have one that is going to help us understand
Orlando Sequera: the expected monetary value
Orlando Sequera: decision, 3 analysis, the diagram.
Orlando Sequera: a diagram in technique
Orlando Sequera: that can help us to understand the implications of multiple options.
Orlando Sequera: Influence diagrams, can help in the decision making process. You try to understand the impact
Orlando Sequera: and the root cost of certain problems and try to start relating multiple variables
Orlando Sequera: or variables. My apologies
Orlando Sequera: and spect the monetary value. That is.
Orlando Sequera: technique that we use to understand
Orlando Sequera: the monetary value of
Orlando Sequera: choosing a particular alternative over another one
Orlando Sequera: by following basically a decision 3, and place in monetary value in both options. So we have multiple ways that we can use
Orlando Sequera: 4
Orlando Sequera: predictive this is for predictive. If we're following a predictive approach
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to risks.
Orlando Sequera: And this is a question that I have that i'm going to. I'm past the chat, for
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to risks. Do you think that
Orlando Sequera: for addicted projects are most often affected by the impact of cost-related risks?
Orlando Sequera: And, on the other hand, add their projects are affected by the impact of time related risks
Orlando Sequera: the chat has been in.
Orlando Sequera: So
Orlando Sequera: in for in I see i'm gonna i'm gonna post the chat. So thank you for your replies.
Orlando Sequera: and in in many cases yes, but we have to when it comes to risk. And the whole point of this
Orlando Sequera: 2 questions we we can. When it comes to risk management, we have to have an open mind. We have to
Orlando Sequera: in some cases. Yes, this might be your your first indication, but we gotta look at a case by case. Risk can come in any way, shape or form. We have to have an open mind when it comes to risk. This might be true in some cases, but it's not always going to be the case, so we have to be it thorough when it comes to
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to that. And
Orlando Sequera: you might have
Orlando Sequera: some race that are more common for situations, but in most cases I will tend to agree that this is a true statement initially. But the point here is that you get it. Don't. Stay on the assumption. Only validate your assumption you, if you think that this is true, just
if
Orlando Sequera: that is not a replacement for an answer, you have to be very specific. You have to be a very careful when it comes to a when it comes to risk management. Okay, Don't. Go just with your
Orlando Sequera: with your assumption, with your what your God is telling you. Go
Orlando Sequera: to analyze identified risks.
Orlando Sequera: They are specific to your project.
Orlando Sequera: Okay, the first step. So we analyze risks. So step number one, identifying risks.
Orlando Sequera: Step number 2,
Orlando Sequera: if
Orlando Sequera: is analyzing risks.
Orlando Sequera: but it has 2 types of analysis. 2: a is
Orlando Sequera: qualitative risk. Analysis
Orlando Sequera: is subjective. To be is quantitative risk analysis. So the first step.
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to risk management is
Orlando Sequera: coming up with that response. What do we do? Okay, Great. We identify our risks. We analyze it
Orlando Sequera: quantitatively and qualitatively. What do we do now?
Orlando Sequera: That's where the responses are going to come into play.
Orlando Sequera: This is what we're going to implement. This is what we're going to do. If those risks come to fruition
Orlando Sequera: a risk responses ideally, and this is our best practices, they should be
Orlando Sequera: appropriate to the risk. They should be cost-effective, because we need time and money to implement this responses. So we have to be we're the stewards of the schedule and the stewards off the budget over
Orlando Sequera: as a project manager. So they got to be cost-effective. They have to be realistic within the project context. That's why we prioritize our risk register. Okay, they have to get they. We have to be.
Orlando Sequera: We have to be on the same page with our stakeholders.
Orlando Sequera: and we need to have a designated risk owner for every single risk. These are good practices. Remember this for the exam.
Orlando Sequera: and also for your daily life as a project manager
Orlando Sequera: going back to some terminology for risk responses.
Orlando Sequera: a trigger condition, sickness that at risk can develop.
Orlando Sequera: There's a hurricane in the Atlantic that is coming this way to the eastern coast of the Us. If you're in construction.
Orlando Sequera: you want to make sure that you are
Orlando Sequera: that you are ready for that.
Orlando Sequera: If that if the risk comes to fridge or risk of structural damage, for example, or risk of flooding, you have to implement
Orlando Sequera: the risk response. However.
Orlando Sequera: when you implement risk responses. You might create
Orlando Sequera: all the risks.
Orlando Sequera: so that not all implementations of risk response implementations are going to be bulletproof. You might create some
Orlando Sequera: residual risk or a secondary risk.
Orlando Sequera: Okay, that that happens, you might create all the risks by implementing your response. That happens in some cases.
Orlando Sequera: or you may have some left over risk, which is what we call residual risk
Orlando Sequera: that has to be addressed.
Orlando Sequera: 4 risks that are high probability and high impact, specially threats or negative risks always have
Orlando Sequera: Plan B, which is what we call a contingency.
Orlando Sequera: In the event of that primary response not working, you're gonna have a plan. B: that's what we call a fall back or contingency.
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: we need
Orlando Sequera: again to address this risks. We need 2 things: we need time and money. That's what we get with the contingency reserve. That's why we have
Orlando Sequera: a contingency reserve in our schedule certain amount of time, and is also in our budget a certain amount of money that is going to help us to address the risks
Orlando Sequera: that we were able to identify to our project. You might be wondering if data set formula for contingency recepts. Nope, there's no a set formula is usually a percentage
Orlando Sequera: of
Orlando Sequera: your budget, and it is also affected
Orlando Sequera: by the number of risks
Orlando Sequera: that you have been able to identify, and it changes from industry to industry, from organization to organization. But it's usually expressed as a percentage I have seen in some cases, 5% of the button of the budget. I have seen it. 10%. It changes. Okay. But there's not a set.
Orlando Sequera: But the point is that you need to have a set amount of money and a certain amount of time that will help you to address those risk and implement these responses.
Orlando Sequera: What are the responses
Orlando Sequera: we have
Orlando Sequera: responses for? First of all, we have responses for
Orlando Sequera: both
Orlando Sequera: a
Orlando Sequera: negative risks or threats, and we also have responses for positive risks or opportunities.
Orlando Sequera: Escalation.
Orlando Sequera: that is.
Orlando Sequera: and we talked about escalation before
Orlando Sequera: it. That is the last resort. You should think of escalation as the last resort
Orlando Sequera: whenever the threat
Orlando Sequera: clearly clearly exceeds your authority as a project manager.
Orlando Sequera: Then
Orlando Sequera: do you have to be?
Orlando Sequera: Then you can escalate to have
Orlando Sequera: someone else
Orlando Sequera: the sponsor, for example, or someone else with higher authority that can help you to address a this situation it's usually it's usually tied up to unidentified risks.
Orlando Sequera: In in many cases. What do we do? I I can. So I didn't plan for this. What can I do? For example?
Orlando Sequera: a a a natural disaster that you
Orlando Sequera: accounting for a major? Well, when we use the example of software, that again, a major earthquake in some further than you're in the construction department. This is a this is
Orlando Sequera: we don't have anything in the risk, for what do I do? Maybe in that case where we're going to have to we we have to escalate in that in that regard we we we can solve it with project management. We need other people to help
Orlando Sequera: for the purposes of the exam
Orlando Sequera: usually, and I mentioned that before, and I'm going to mention that again. Usually escalation is the wrong answer, because this collection implies that someone else is so it's going to solve the problem for you. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: it is
Orlando Sequera: an option in some cases, but it is not always
Orlando Sequera: what you have when you can solve it as a project manager with your 30, then it is going to be the answer.
Orlando Sequera: Avoidance
Orlando Sequera: is going to be
Orlando Sequera: it basically when you, If If the overall project risk is in this significantly negative and outside of the agreed upon risk threshold, then most it is important to you can avoid that. a
Orlando Sequera: that area you can. You can avoid that er the scope, for example, that is crossing the risk is possible to do it, and that way you're going to reduce the possible.
Orlando Sequera: the possible negative impact on the project. I remember that in an example in one of my projects it was about Pci compliance, personal credit card information.
Orlando Sequera: we were trying to store the goal West to store and Craig our information for an application that we were using for current information of our users, and they project West to make sure that we were pci compliant. It was part of the project
Orlando Sequera: A, and
Orlando Sequera: basically, we determine we were able to determine with experts that
Orlando Sequera: for pci compliance every single
Orlando Sequera: and every single component of the the network had to be pci compliant. We didn't have the budget for that. So the answer was okay to was, avoid. We're going to avoid that risk
Orlando Sequera: A. And we're not. We're gonna use a different a different approach.
Orlando Sequera: Transference is
Orlando Sequera: the classic example is when the impact of the risk you transfer it to a third party. The classic example is insurance.
Orlando Sequera: or
Orlando Sequera: in that particular case of
Orlando Sequera: my project. When we didn't we use avoidance. We decided not to be pci compliant. That was, we. We went with a different, with an alternate made, or ultimately that probably get canceled. But another option would have been transference if we were to use a third party, for example.
Orlando Sequera: other companies that
Orlando Sequera: want to provide services a to their customers, and this is widely popular. They don't want to deal with Pci compliance because it's very complex and costly. What they do is they use a third party. Their payments are received via paypal, or a, or
Orlando Sequera: sale, or any of the other platforms or square, so that is an example of trans transference. You can transfer that risk to a third party. Insurance is another example of transference. So that is another option that you have, then the next one is probably the most popular one is mitigation
Orlando Sequera: with mitigation. We try to
Orlando Sequera: reduce the probability and impact
Orlando Sequera: and mitigation is the recommended approach for high, probably high impact risks.
Orlando Sequera: Okay, that is the recommended
Orlando Sequera: A
Orlando Sequera: approach
Orlando Sequera: we should board. Mitigation is not the only response.
Orlando Sequera: and the last one is acceptance when you
Orlando Sequera: we're able to identify the risk, but it's usually associated with low impact and low-privative risks.
Orlando Sequera: Then you just accept it, and those are going to be one. They want to go to the actual, a to the lower.
Orlando Sequera: the to the bottom of the of the risk register. Okay, do you? If you have a risk that is high, probably high impact, for example, the risk of floating due to hurricanes in in South Florida that you're not going to use acceptance for that. You gotta use mitigation. Okay. So make sure that you use the right
Orlando Sequera: the write up of response for the right risk. But you're not going to use mitigation for every single risk. You don't have the money in the time to do that. So you ha! That's why we prioritize okay. And, on the other hand, escalation
Orlando Sequera: for opportunities. The same case you can
Orlando Sequera: is there. There's a major opportunity, but you can. It's outside of the scope
Orlando Sequera: and your authority. You'll have to escalate that to another, a to another party, so the opportunity can come to fruition
Orlando Sequera: A. When it comes to exploit, it's the opposite of avoidance. It's doing whatever it takes to
Orlando Sequera: they to take advantage of the opportunity to change course, to change the scope you change whatever you need to change in order to make sure that that opportunity comes to fruition.
Orlando Sequera: A sharing is
Orlando Sequera: basically the same principle of transference.
Orlando Sequera: Think of a joint venture. You might not have to identify the opportunity. But you don't have enough infrastructure to take advantage of the opportunity. Then you join forces with a third party organization to take advantage of the opportunity you might not have all the infrastructure in place.
Orlando Sequera: Enhancing is the opposite of mitigation.
Orlando Sequera: What you try to do with enhance is
Orlando Sequera: maximize the probability and impact of a possible opportunity. You see a great opportunity to make
Orlando Sequera: to, to to profit from from this. from this risk in this case, then you do whatever it takes to increase the probability and impact of that opportunity.
Orlando Sequera: An acceptance is again the same.
Orlando Sequera: and cities for negative risks.
Orlando Sequera: If it happens great. If it doesn't happen.
Orlando Sequera: If it happens, we'll
Orlando Sequera: we'll take it. But if it doesn't happen, it's okay. So we have responses for
Orlando Sequera: threats or negative risks, and we have responses for opportunities and positive risks.
Orlando Sequera: And this is what we have covered so far.
Orlando Sequera: We went over the
Orlando Sequera: 3 steps when it comes to risk. So it starts with risk identification.
Orlando Sequera: then risk assessment, and then we have, and the risk assessment is perform performing that we do it in 2 ways. We perform a qualitative type of analysis, and we perform a quantitative type of analysis.
Orlando Sequera: And then
Orlando Sequera: we went over all of our pre compliance and possible threat to compliance. We have mentioned that before there are risk associated with compliance; and as we mentioned on day one that
Orlando Sequera: important type of risks
Orlando Sequera: that has to be addressed.
Orlando Sequera: You might be
Orlando Sequera: wondering what type of questions am I going to get when it comes to risks. They're going to give you a scenario.
Orlando Sequera: 2 types of questions. The
Orlando Sequera: I ask you point blank. Which one do you think is the the actual next step.
Orlando Sequera: Let's assume for a minute that we are.
Orlando Sequera: This is the situation
Orlando Sequera: A.
Orlando Sequera: We knew that that could happen.
Orlando Sequera: We are
Orlando Sequera: our our house. Our one story house is flooded, and there's some structure of damage
Orlando Sequera: A.
Orlando Sequera: And for we we knew that that could happen that that was a possibility.
Orlando Sequera: What should we do first?
Orlando Sequera: What should we do first? We are working a construction project to build a one-story house
Orlando Sequera: in South Florida.
Orlando Sequera: We knew that that was a possibility.
Orlando Sequera: The structure flooded.
Orlando Sequera: What do we do first? I'm going to open the chat
Orlando Sequera: right now. What do we do first?
Orlando Sequera: What do we do. First.
Orlando Sequera: some of you are given the right answer the first step we knew that it was that it was a possibility. So let me start by saying, i'm going to post the chat right now.
Orlando Sequera: Some of you got it correctly.
Orlando Sequera: The what do we do? First we check the risk register. The scenario is giving you some hints. We knew that this was a possibility, so that means that we were able to identify the risk of floating, and it is somewhere. It is in
Orlando Sequera: the risk register. So what do we do? First pay attention to that keyword First
Orlando Sequera: is check the risk register, as some of you a answer, and I see some of the answers
Orlando Sequera: A r
Orlando Sequera: mitigate efforts. No, that is, that that's already. The mitigation is already in the identified in the risk register. But the first step is to
Orlando Sequera: check the risk register. That has all that information. That's why we do this. We have to do this first before the before the risk can come to fruition. We do this. This is part of the planning efforts. This happens at the beginning of your project. You got to have this in place. You cannot be getting ready when the hurricane is on top of
Orlando Sequera: it's it's already on on top of your area. Right? We plan. We plan to be ready for that. A. For that possible risks. So no, we check the risk register. That is, first step. I'm going to ask another question.
Orlando Sequera: This is another type of question that you make it in your exempt.
Orlando Sequera: We did not see that coming.
Orlando Sequera: We're let's assume that we're. We're building
Orlando Sequera: a house in the Nevada area near Las Vegas.
Orlando Sequera: and we did an account for the risk of flooding.
Orlando Sequera: But we're floating right now. What do we do first?
Orlando Sequera: What do we do? First?
Orlando Sequera: We didn't see that one coming
Orlando Sequera: this weather is. Some heard of
Orlando Sequera: the structure flawed it.
Orlando Sequera: What do we do. First
Orlando Sequera: there is another.
Orlando Sequera: There is another
Orlando Sequera: artifact that we can review.
Orlando Sequera: What do you do when your car breaks
Orlando Sequera: when you get a weird light, and your car breaks in the middle of the road.
Orlando Sequera: Okay, in this one. No, not not come on, not Google. It?
Orlando Sequera: So the answer is in the context of project management. You have to review the the users guide right? The owner, Sky, the owners may the Car manual.
Orlando Sequera: That's what you try to do to find out what that is in this case. In this context, for project management is
Orlando Sequera: going to be your risk management plan. That's why we create risk management plan.
Orlando Sequera: That's what's gonna that's what we have to check.
Orlando Sequera: It's not in the register, because this is unheard of. We never have this type of weather in
Orlando Sequera: in the middle of the desert.
Orlando Sequera: Right? This is unheard of.
Orlando Sequera: We didn't account for this. It's not in the register. We were not able to identify it. We have to check the
Orlando Sequera: the risk management plan.
Orlando Sequera: That is our owner's Guy, the users guy that's what we have to check. Those are the type of questions that you're going to be getting in your exam. So about critical thinking, critical thinking. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: So
Orlando Sequera: all right.
Orlando Sequera: Now, we're going to continue with our next topic, and that is quality. We're going to talk about quality
Orlando Sequera: when I continue your journey. My recommendation again is, please take
Orlando Sequera: practice questions
Orlando Sequera: in test prep in Precipio. That's going to help you to address these scenarios for the questions on a straightforward like that. They are scenario based.
Orlando Sequera: and they're going to ask you keywords like.
Orlando Sequera: Do I do first what I? What do I do next?
Orlando Sequera: who should be in in, in, in, in, in? In this response. So look for the keywords. What is the best
Orlando Sequera: approach or the best solution for this situation? Look for the keywords next first best.
Orlando Sequera: That is key. When you're reading the Pmp. Exam. Questions.
Orlando Sequera: all right quality
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to quality. This is
Orlando Sequera: it boils down the the the simplest definition of quality is, how Well, are we meeting
Orlando Sequera: the requirements? How well
Orlando Sequera: our deliverables are meeting the requirements. So quality is driven by
Orlando Sequera: the requirements. Okay, gonna petition to a requirement? So how well are we meeting those requirements?
Orlando Sequera: That is the level of quality.
Orlando Sequera: There is a common misconception out there that people tend to confuse
Orlando Sequera: quality and great.
Orlando Sequera: and for
Orlando Sequera: this example I would like to use 2 type of of
Orlando Sequera: 2 type of cars. We're gonna use cars to understand the difference between quality and grade
Orlando Sequera: we have. On one hand, we have a Honda civic.
Orlando Sequera: 2,020,
Orlando Sequera: and, on the other hand, we have a Ferrari.
Orlando Sequera: whichever model you like
Orlando Sequera: better. Probably it's a Ferrari 2,021
Orlando Sequera: or 2,022.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: So
Orlando Sequera: which one is higher quality.
Orlando Sequera: I'm gonna open the chat for a second.
Orlando Sequera: based on what I said is based on the requirements
Orlando Sequera: which one has higher quality.
Orlando Sequera: Well, the right answer. It depends.
Orlando Sequera: It depends on the requirements. Exactly.
Orlando Sequera: Exactly. It depends on the requirements. The requirements are.
Orlando Sequera: I want a car. I'm the buyer, and I want a car that is
Orlando Sequera: that is
Orlando Sequera: build efficient as much as possible, and it's reliable as much as possible. They don't have to take it to the shop every week When a card that is reliable, and then like, and I want a car that is
Orlando Sequera: fuel efficient which one has is those are the requirements which one has higher quality.
Orlando Sequera: Open the chat.
Orlando Sequera: they home that civic correct.
Orlando Sequera: But when it comes to great
Orlando Sequera: i'm going to post the chat when it comes to great.
Orlando Sequera: that's
Orlando Sequera: different. That's when we're comparing both vehicles, apples to apples. When you compare the engine of the Honda civic to the engine of the Ferrari
Orlando Sequera: apples to apples.
Orlando Sequera: would you compare the interior of the Honda Civic to the one of the Ferrari? Would you compare the exterior of the Honda Civic to the exterior of the Ferrari. So if
Orlando Sequera: if we're talking about rate.
Orlando Sequera: what which one has hired rate
Orlando Sequera: the home, the saving, or the Ferrari.
Orlando Sequera: the Ferrari, but right by far hands down. So
Orlando Sequera: that is
Orlando Sequera: the simplest way to understand quality.
Orlando Sequera: So
Orlando Sequera: since I'm. Going to post the the chat, since we said
Orlando Sequera: that
Orlando Sequera: quality is how well
Orlando Sequera: our product service of result meets the requirements or fulfill the requirements. Okay, we need to understand the requirements. They include
Orlando Sequera: compliance with standards. There might be some standards that we have to be compliant with. That's why we review our PA.
Orlando Sequera: It it's also about continuous improvement. There's always a better way of doing things that is continuous. We're gonna talk about that. And we need to, more importantly take into account our stakeholders expectations and our end user satisfaction.
Orlando Sequera: That's why the quality aspect is so important
Orlando Sequera: in our projects, and when it comes to quality
Orlando Sequera: there is going to be a cost associated with quality.
Orlando Sequera: and we can look at it from 2 perspectives
Orlando Sequera: is what we call cost of quality.
Orlando Sequera: We can look at it from a
Orlando Sequera: proactive perspective.
Orlando Sequera: which is the money spent, and the time as well in avoiding failure.
Orlando Sequera: And that's what we call prevention costs. And this involves documentation, having the right equipment training our people to do it right, taking the time to do it right.
Orlando Sequera: It
Orlando Sequera: document in the processes, and it's also about testing and inspections. Qa: You quality assurance
Orlando Sequera: that is
Orlando Sequera: one type of cost of one aspect, one aspect of cost of quality.
Orlando Sequera: but he has another component, which is
Orlando Sequera: cost after the fact. After the failure came to fruition. There is, we we have in in their rework. When we have to fix defects. For example, a.
Orlando Sequera: We have scrap if we're working manufacturing, and then we also have warranties that need to be at the that need to be honored
Orlando Sequera: liabilities.
Orlando Sequera: and also damages to the brand of the organization lost business.
Orlando Sequera: So
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to cost of quality that the money Spain after
Orlando Sequera: during and after point, because of failure, is exponentially higher.
Orlando Sequera: then
Orlando Sequera: the one that we should take into then the one from a proactive is exponentially higher compared to the proactive standpoint. So it's better to invest in being proactive.
Orlando Sequera: then having to spend the money later
Orlando Sequera: in being reactive because it's going to be exponentially higher. But you combine the 2, and that's what we call cost of quality.
Okay.
Orlando Sequera: A: that's cost of quality.
Orlando Sequera: We also have
Orlando Sequera: to.
Orlando Sequera: When it comes to quality, we have to take into account the expectations of our customers.
Orlando Sequera: We need to identify the quality requirements.
Orlando Sequera: and that is, it will find a predictive approach that is important, and that's going to be part of our quality management plan. We need a specific plan that we're going to follow for our quality.
Orlando Sequera: All right. So when
Orlando Sequera: a promise happened, we don't have to. We. We know what to do. That's why we create the plan. And also
Orlando Sequera: this is an ongoing process. It's about observation paying attention. It's about continuous improvement. It's always room for doing things in a more efficient way, but we have to follow the guidance of the quality policy. That's why, when we were talking about Opa, we the quality policy is an important aspect of it.
Okay.
Orlando Sequera: And the quality management plan is the specific a guidelines that we're going to follow the rules of engagement that we're going to follow for quality, and then the quality policy is
Orlando Sequera: the guidelines specific to the organization. When it comes to quality.
Orlando Sequera: the quality management plan is going to cover.
Orlando Sequera: All the activities are needed to achieve the quality objectives of the project.
Orlando Sequera: It can be formal or informal. It changes from organization to organization, and has to be reviewed
Orlando Sequera: thoroughly throughout the project. It can change, it can be modified.
Orlando Sequera: What is about the project value, proposition.
Orlando Sequera: identifying possible cost reduction for a project in the goal is to one of the benefits associated with it is to be able to mitigate schedule overruns from rework. Because we're dress. We invest in quality that's going to translate into less reward, less defects, less number of defects.
Orlando Sequera: A. After those deliverables are produced.
Orlando Sequera: We also have to take contract.
Orlando Sequera: Our compliance requirements. Compliance is super important. We're going to have. We have to pay attention to compliance requirements. It can be any regulation that is applicable to our industry and your organizational policies
Orlando Sequera: A.
Orlando Sequera: The implications when it comes to product and project quality requirements. And we have to classify these compliance requirements, understand the impacts of potential negative risks associated to compliance and have a response.
Orlando Sequera: And also
Orlando Sequera: And this is going to be information that is covered in your risk register. That is crucial.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: there are multiple quality standards and regulations.
Orlando Sequera: A standard is a document that established by an actual authority.
Orlando Sequera: they. There is one that is very common widely known, which is the one that Vmi follows, which is the international organization for standardization, or Iso.
Orlando Sequera: or at least some of you are very familiar with that, and that's the one that mainly Pmi Pmi follows, and they're actually is applicable. They apply the 9,000 series for project management.
Orlando Sequera: It's aligned with the 9,000 series.
Orlando Sequera: That's a standard. Then we also have regulations or lost that are applicable
Orlando Sequera: to our industry. We have to take those into account.
Orlando Sequera: We also have some what they call it the factor Standards there are
Orlando Sequera: widely accepted.
Orlando Sequera: but it's not mandatory right. They They are best practices. But there you don't have to. Necessarily. It's not mandated that you have to follow them, but they are. Consider best practices, and then we have, what they call the dual regulations. A like, for example, a
Orlando Sequera: frequent path for schedule management is an example of that. That's
Orlando Sequera: It's approved by a body of experts. In this case. a group of person mansion pretty much for institute. Okay, it's not mandated by law to use the the curriculum path. Let me highlight that what is what is recognized by a body of experts is one of the best ways to manage your schedule.
Orlando Sequera: All right. We have to.
Orlando Sequera: We have to do that
Orlando Sequera: A.
Orlando Sequera: Please make sure that you are aware of the fact
Orlando Sequera: which standards of regulations are applicable in your industry. That's why we review Opa's.
Orlando Sequera: Okay. That is the one of the answers Why, we have to review Opa's.
Okay.
Orlando Sequera: And then, when it comes to quality we have to be able to measure it.
Orlando Sequera: We have to be able to measure it. That's why we use metrics. We do that through testing, and we as multiple tools
Orlando Sequera: for that. And we also gonna have a threshold or quality tolerance.
Orlando Sequera: and we can include checklist templates and quality artifacts.
Orlando Sequera: and that's going to be contained in your quality management plan
Orlando Sequera: for teams that are using the agent approach. They use
Orlando Sequera: a specific ceremony or or meeting that is called the retrospective. This is where they go over. They They they have the opportunity to
Orlando Sequera: identify possible improvements. Lessons learned in the work that was done. But quality is applicable
Orlando Sequera: to both predictive and adaptive projects.
Orlando Sequera: Having said that
Orlando Sequera: going to go ahead and take a break.
Orlando Sequera: We're ready for a second break. We'll be back in 10 min.
Orlando Sequera: Enjoy your break.
Orlando Sequera: All right, then we're back.
Orlando Sequera: We're going to continue
Orlando Sequera: with our session. And
Orlando Sequera: so we were saying, we have to measure quality, and there are multiple ways that we can do that.
Orlando Sequera: And when it comes to quality
Orlando Sequera: we also have to take into account
Orlando Sequera: continuous improvement.
Orlando Sequera: One of the there's always
Orlando Sequera: a way to do things better.
Orlando Sequera: It's been evolving, and the in P. My uses
Orlando Sequera: There's several. There's a lot of work quality by itself. It's a major area that some of you. This is where 6 sigma, for example. That's quality.
Orlando Sequera: A about it's about the number of defects, keeping that to a very small number of defects that it's its own discipline by itself. They have certifications on that. The green bail, the yellow Bell, the Black Belt in in 6 sigmites. It's on discipline. Okay, but that is
Orlando Sequera: one method for continuous improvement. That's the goal. That Lin 6 Sigma has. Then you have t make, which is focusing on removing waste
Orlando Sequera: tison. That is about
Orlando Sequera: changing for the better continuous improvement. Actually, you also have the Pdc. A cycle plan. Do check act that Dr. Deming came up with
Orlando Sequera: a great books that have been written on the plan. Do check act cycle. That's one of the foundations of continuous improvement.
Orlando Sequera: and in agile you have from it that helps with continuous improvements all about that a Camden, and also another flavor of agile that is called crystal methods.
Orlando Sequera: so that is widely used they.
Orlando Sequera: regardless of the approach. There is going to be a quality method for continuous improvement, regardless of the approach on my that I mean, regardless of whether we go agile or we go traditional.
Orlando Sequera: All right. We are going to talk a little bit more about continuous improvement when we get to less than 5
Orlando Sequera: and if you wanna get ready for that, review it in advance, by all means. But we're gonna get a little bit deeper when it comes to
Orlando Sequera: a
Orlando Sequera: continuous improvement.
Orlando Sequera: and we talked about quality of products and deliverables, and we understand now the difference between quantity and great.
Orlando Sequera: and the importance of quality, that
Orlando Sequera: cost of quality super super super important for your exam. To understand the cost of quality is the more customer facing which is
Orlando Sequera: A. When the products are in the hands of the customer they hire is going to be. So we want to invest in the cost of prevention
Orlando Sequera: a invest in training in taking the time to do things right in best invest in testing. So when the product services and results are in the hands of our customers, we are, it's
Orlando Sequera: They're going to be the best shape possible. Okay, so that's it's that's a good. It's a good idea to be
Orlando Sequera: proactive and not reactive when it comes to the cost of quantity. And we also talked a little bit about managing project compliance, the importance of managing those aspects.
Orlando Sequera: and that takes us to integration.
Orlando Sequera: This is where everything comes together. We have been talking about those multiple areas of our projects
Orlando Sequera: that are.
Orlando Sequera: and we're building multiple plans, communication management plan, stakeholder, engagement, plan, race management plans, COVID-19.
Orlando Sequera: Our cost management plan, schedule management plan, etc.
Orlando Sequera: They all need to come together. We need to be able to look at our project from an integrated perspective.
Orlando Sequera: The best analogy that I will use when it comes to explaining integration is, I want you to think of
Orlando Sequera: those multiple areas. I want you to think of an orchestra okay, an orchestra
Orlando Sequera: and those multiple areas
Orlando Sequera: that you have in your project mind that I mean risk
Orlando Sequera: stakeholders, communication
Orlando Sequera: schedule
Orlando Sequera: cost, etc. Those multiple areas imagine them as the different types of instruments. By the way, i'm not an expert music. But imagine some. We have the the the percussion instruments, and we have the we have the different type of flutes and the different type of instruments that
Orlando Sequera: combined form the orchestra. But they all need to come together right. And then think of your project, members as the musicians.
Orlando Sequera: and I want you to think of you as the project manager as the orchestra conductor. Okay. The goal with
Orlando Sequera: your project management work in your project should be the goal that any orchestra has. Whenever they play a
Orlando Sequera: Wh. Whenever they play, they they they play a piece or song, which is to produce a symphony
Orlando Sequera: in order to produce a symphony.
Orlando Sequera: Every single musician has to play their instrument at the right time, and coordination has to happen. Right. You see the orchestra conductor. They're not just moving their arms.
Orlando Sequera: They musicians know they are following. They're reading their their notes, and they know when they have to play, but they're paying attention to to the conductor, so they know when to play their instruments, and if everybody's coordinated, they produce the symphony. Otherwise it's going to be noise.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: So in order for that to happen in the that is for an orchestra, right? So you are the orchestra conductor of your project. Your projecting members are the musicians, and then all the different types of instruments are going to be all these different areas that we have in our project. But they all need to come together, and we can achieve that through integration. This is super important.
Orlando Sequera: This is where all of it comes together.
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: the goal, the actual outcome of this integration is going to be the overall project management plan. This is where all those subsidiary plans are going to come together. But you need to have one consolidated view of all those different plans they need because they have impacts, as as we said before.
Orlando Sequera: your scope, your scheduled, your a budget they are. They have implications with each other. Quality has implications with cost and schedule and scope, and they all interconnected. But we can manage them in in different silos. They all need to come together. That's what we do with integration.
Orlando Sequera: Okay, that's what we do with integration.
Orlando Sequera: We have to integrate all those considered plans.
Orlando Sequera: And this is something that you may be wondering who has to do this. That's you, the project manager. You are
Orlando Sequera: responsible for integrating those plans. Okay, that is crucial, because that's how we have to manage our our project. Then, when it comes to
Orlando Sequera: and an agent approach, we have every iteration a structure in place that is going to help us to integrate
Orlando Sequera: multiple areas of the project. We have ceremonies for that that because we work in a different way. So we have. We're working in iterations. But we're going to have ceremonies that are going to help us to make adjustments and to integrate multiple areas of our project, and if we're following a hybrid approach, we have to reframe the fraud, have
Orlando Sequera: reframe the approach, have the flexibility and figure out a way to work with the different planning elements in
Orlando Sequera: as active
Orlando Sequera: while working. So you have to. You need to have that flexibility. Okay? So this happens in predictive in ha in agile. Or if we're following a hybrid approach
Orlando Sequera: all right.
Orlando Sequera: And
Orlando Sequera: this takes us to
Orlando Sequera: something that we keep mentioning.
Orlando Sequera: How do we
Orlando Sequera: address change
Orlando Sequera: in up with. If we're following a predictive approach, how how do we can we change those baseline, the score baseline, the query, baseline the budget.
Orlando Sequera: the the cost baseline, this Co. The scope based on Can they be changed? Can I change anything in my predictive project? The answer is, Yes, but it has to be controlled.
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: this is how we do it with
Orlando Sequera: following integrated change control. So we need to have another plan that is called the Change management plan that is going to specify. We need to know who can propose a change?
Orlando Sequera: What is a change?
Orlando Sequera: What exactly is a change?
Orlando Sequera: What is the impact on the change of the change on project objectives.
Orlando Sequera: What are the steps that we need to follow in order to evaluate a change request which, by the way is step number one. In using the change control process.
Orlando Sequera: who has the 40 to approve
Orlando Sequera: changes
Orlando Sequera: that has to be determined is usually a change Control Board, which is an entity formed by
Orlando Sequera: a upper management expert
Orlando Sequera: decision makers that can approve these changes, and they're going to evaluate the impact on what the impact on the cost, the impact on the schedule, the impact on the scope and they're going to make a determination. Usually project managers are not part of that change control Board
Orlando Sequera: A. When the change request is approved. What happens when needs to happens afterwards?
Orlando Sequera: How is that change gonna be implemented? How can we make sure that the change was indeed implemented. So we use how can you confirm completion and quality? Then we have ways of doing that. So all that information is going to be in what we call a change management plan.
Orlando Sequera: If we're following.
Orlando Sequera: we need to have a plan for complexity and change.
Orlando Sequera: We have.
Orlando Sequera: and complexity within a come within a project is going to be the result of the organization system.
Orlando Sequera: human behavior, and the level of uncertainty of ambiguity.
Orlando Sequera: The team has to create a way of working with that complexity, to navigate that complexity, and these are some sits
Orlando Sequera: and some best practices. So try to disconnect parts of the system to simplify it and have a better understanding, basically divide and conquer.
Orlando Sequera: You can use simulation to use similar unrelated scenarios to understand complexity. It reframe the problem, viewer, view the problem from different perspectives. And this is where, having a diverse team can help you because you can look at it from different perspectives
Orlando Sequera: or a balancing we're considering the type of data that is being used, or it can be processed based, can be
Orlando Sequera: through an iteration approach, plan iteratively or incrementally at features at a time, engage, or or having a failed safe, a plan for failure.
Orlando Sequera: that, and mostly when we are a navigating this high level of complexity.
Orlando Sequera: The best bet is going to be to go with an agile approach.
Orlando Sequera: and how this
Orlando Sequera: approach
Orlando Sequera: this fails fast and self correct. How does it work? Well.
Orlando Sequera: instead of planning, then, what we do is we focus on resiliency because we remember we're dealing with a lot of complexity
Orlando Sequera: we might not be able to plan. That's where following a measured approach. If we're navigating with a high level of complexity, that's why the recommendation is to go with an agile approach, not with a predictive approach, because we don't have enough information to plan. Okay, it's going to be.
Orlando Sequera: Chances are that it's going to be a waste of effort. So it's more about building, resiliency, adaptability
Orlando Sequera: and tailoring, and having more importantly having a mindset that fosters collaboration with the teams, take home and stakeholders to achieve that level of adaptability and resilience.
Orlando Sequera: All right. What have we cover? So far?
Orlando Sequera: We cover integration
Orlando Sequera: that is super important. This is where everything comes together. The main outcome here is the overall project management plan.
Orlando Sequera: and we also talked about strategies for handling changes.
Orlando Sequera: and this takes us to the end of Lesson 3,
Orlando Sequera: and now we're going to move on to Lesson number 4. I like to take
Orlando Sequera: Take a couple of minutes to go over some questions in the
Orlando Sequera: chat, and we're going to
Orlando Sequera: in the Q. A. I'm. Sorry in the Q. A.
Orlando Sequera: It's a question. Can we talk about question to a slide 31. Well
Orlando Sequera: gotta be a little bit more specific because we're going to have stopping points. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: I'm gonna have some stopping points. So
Orlando Sequera: a
Orlando Sequera: What he mentioned plan is by is created by the project manager working with the team members.
Orlando Sequera: It's risk finding the same in agile and predicted model projects, you should.
Orlando Sequera: for it's risk identification.
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: you have to perform risk notification regardless of the approach.
Orlando Sequera: Another question in the Q. And a. Do you assign risk owners in adaptive as well, or just for predictive?
Orlando Sequera: You can do it an adaptive as well. Yes.
Orlando Sequera: you know that that comes with who is lead for identifying a mitigating risks in self-forming team. The team members, the team members, and if they need help they have to communicate that for primarily the team members, but if they need some special depending on the risk.
Orlando Sequera: they need help from other team. They have to communicate that
Orlando Sequera: that will be
Orlando Sequera: a a topic that will be brought up in the daily coordination meeting or the daily Stand up if if it's an impediment. Okay. So but primarily the team members under an adaptive approach
Orlando Sequera: a risk corners internal, external. It depends on the risk, and you decide with the team and
Orlando Sequera: these stakeholders.
Orlando Sequera: But whomever has the most knowledge it can be someone outside of the team. No, necessarily a team member.
Orlando Sequera: But
Orlando Sequera: you're working with stakeholders. This is probably a topic that is gonna be coming very often in a project status meeting. So you're gonna get the per the it's
Orlando Sequera: the we don't need to the most familiar with that type of risk that is going to be assigned with their response.
Orlando Sequera: Did you assign? Okay, do some risk owners in adaptive as well as just predictive. I just answer that.
Orlando Sequera: Are we performing this for each project? Yes, you should. The answer is, yes. Could there be a repository risk bill for the company, and we pull for that for a particular project. That will be a lesson learned. But your project is different. Your project is specific, so you should create
Orlando Sequera: at risk register for your own project. You should create an issue list for your own project. So you have to create this for every single project. Can you leverage lessons from the past? All the risk registers from past projects? Yes, but your specific project. You have to do it for the specific project.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: welcome to project management.
Orlando Sequera: okay.
Orlando Sequera: What is the best practice to consider the risk into the cost and completion calculation to rely on the people doing the work on your subject matter experts.
Orlando Sequera: our integration plans only for predictive approaches. No, you should.
Orlando Sequera: You can apply that to
Orlando Sequera: it. It doesn't hurt to implement it in.
Orlando Sequera: You know that as well.
Orlando Sequera: Who is responsible for integrating quality plan in agile
Orlando Sequera: the team members
Orlando Sequera: mainly the scrum master.
Orlando Sequera: the semester working with the team members.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: all right. So i'm gonna continue. Then this is the end of Session 3.
Orlando Sequera: And
Orlando Sequera: now we're going to start talking about leading the project team. So this is mainly
Orlando Sequera: we're going to be covering topics related to the
Orlando Sequera: people domain important for the exam.
Orlando Sequera: And what we are going to be covering. This lesson for is going to be about craft. Your leadership skills
Orlando Sequera: create a collaborative project team environment.
Orlando Sequera: empowering the team, supporting team performance communication and collaboration with stakeholders. That is the second time that this is coming up. That should give an idea. It is important for the exam.
Orlando Sequera: and then also training, coaching, and mentoring, and last, but not least, about managing conflict.
Orlando Sequera: We're going to try to understand the guidelines for
Orlando Sequera: growing our resources, developing their competencies and skills, understanding the different leadership, styles.
Orlando Sequera: artifacts, and strategies to be successful
Orlando Sequera: in the
Orlando Sequera: A. In this in this specific topic
Orlando Sequera: the characteristics and core functions of teams that are empowered
Orlando Sequera: the forms of communication and collaboration in ideal in a project team environment.
Orlando Sequera: understand the importance of value
Orlando Sequera: and value of training and coaching and mentoring a team. So 3 different things, by the way.
Orlando Sequera: and also super important. I'm gonna highlight that for the Pmp. Exam. Conflict management super important for the exam config is gonna happen. We're gonna talk about it, and we're gonna go over some
Orlando Sequera: a techniques to for conflict resolution. But you should expect questions on your Pmp. Exam related to conflict management and also look at the levels of conflict and their outcomes
Orlando Sequera: teams, as we know, for anyone that has worked in Project manager and you have individuals that have different skill sets different levels of experience, different attitudes. They're from different countries in some cases different cultures, right? But the goal to be successful with any project is to have a team
Orlando Sequera: that is productive and effective, and, as we have learned
Orlando Sequera: in May in most cases as the project manager. We're not going to have the level of authority, so we have to use something else. We have to use leadership. This is needed.
Orlando Sequera: This is a trade that is required on everyone on the project team, especially the project manager. This is super super, super, important
Orlando Sequera: for
Orlando Sequera: skills
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to
Orlando Sequera: being able to work with others, communicate and having empathy and being able to relate to others, come into play. This is super super super important.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: how can we develop
Orlando Sequera: inclusive leadership competencies.
Orlando Sequera: You should tailor your leadership style to the situation
Orlando Sequera: a ideally. You should live with empathy, so pay attention to what happens to others. It's not just about you. It's about the team. You got to put the team first.
Orlando Sequera: understand what motivates the team members in their working styles and understand that this changes. I'm going to give you a real life example in the Artemis program. I was in a very particular situation in which
Orlando Sequera: I worked in project team with project teams that they
Orlando Sequera: that were form by
Orlando Sequera: people from
Orlando Sequera: A for from different a generations.
Orlando Sequera: And by that I mean, we have on one hand
Orlando Sequera: some engineers that work in the shuttle program, and, as you know, the shutter program lasts to 30 years.
Orlando Sequera: and it ended in 2,011, and we still have some a professional that worked in. Some of them actually work for the entire a 30 years in in the shuttle program. And now they're working in the Artemis program that has been gonna for a little bit
Orlando Sequera: more than 10 years. So
Orlando Sequera: those are baby boomers
Orlando Sequera: in their getting close.
Orlando Sequera: if not already a close to we terminate.
Orlando Sequera: But, on the other hand, we have
Orlando Sequera: a few millennials, but we have a lot of Gen. Z.
Orlando Sequera: We have
Orlando Sequera: fresh
Orlando Sequera: dream brand new engineers that just came out rather college as a super bright.
Orlando Sequera: and they're working in this in these projects. So we have baby boomers on one side, and we also have Gen. Zs a few millennials, and then
Orlando Sequera: a few of us. I'm a Jim i'm a Gen. Xer.
Orlando Sequera: and there are right in the middle.
Orlando Sequera: and this the motivation for a baby boomer is totally different compared to the one of agenda, and the working style is totally different. So it re as the project manager. You have to understand that and take take the time to really navigate through that, so you can be effect
Orlando Sequera: in order to that. Well, old machine that is the project team
Orlando Sequera: and another guideline that can help you to be successful is about transparency and openness to build. Trust with your team. That's crucial.
Orlando Sequera: The team has to trust you. Get. They have to get to the point that they know that you have their back, and vice versa.
Orlando Sequera: and for those of you that come from the military. Do you know this better than me? Same principle here, right same principle here it's it's about teamwork. It's about. We we have to
Orlando Sequera: it's a it's all of us. It's all of us, not just me. It's all of us all right.
Orlando Sequera: and then make sure that external resources are also included.
Orlando Sequera: Not just the team. It's also about the stakeholders
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to
Orlando Sequera: the skills that you need to in order to work well with your team and also your stakeholders is about communication.
Orlando Sequera: and that's something that you're gonna be doing as a project manager for a most of the time. According to some some experts, 90% of your time as a project manager is going to be spend in communicating in one
Orlando Sequera: way or another.
Orlando Sequera: Okay, it's important that we can communicate
Orlando Sequera: conflict management, super super super important critical thinking, not only for leadership, but also for the Pmp. Exam: so a problem solving cultural awareness, decision making key aspect of project management.
Orlando Sequera: Also
Orlando Sequera: the emotional intelligence technique
Orlando Sequera: that is, emotional intelligence that is super important. It's not just about a IQ. It's also about Eq. Or Emotional intelligence following an ethical approach. That's also part of the Pmp mindset that I that I mentioned briefly before expertise. As for judgment, facilitation
Orlando Sequera: as the Pm. You're going to be doing that in more in in multiple ways, meeting management, super important negotiation with your team members with stakeholders that is crucial.
Orlando Sequera: Think of you as a diplomat as well.
Orlando Sequera: Networking net, working with home with your team members, with your stakeholders. That's crucial. That's key. I'm: Probably one of the most important ones is about team building.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: All right
Orlando Sequera: in the personal team skills, active listening
Orlando Sequera: and communication Styles assessment we mentioned before. That is important. With active listening.
Orlando Sequera: Make sure what you're trying you trying to make sure that you're understanding, and and you're acknowledged, and understanding what you pay attention to what you're a to the message that you're receiving from with the people that you're communicated with your center intended. So the message is coming across.
Orlando Sequera: and remember that we need to understand the communication styles a that are
Orlando Sequera: going to be work with each individual. So we need to perform that a
Orlando Sequera: that awareness, then emotional intelligence, not letting your actions dictate your emotions dictate your actions
Orlando Sequera: in a two-way street influencing motivation nominal group technique.
Orlando Sequera: political awareness and transparency.
Orlando Sequera: When it comes to leadership styles. As we said, we have to tailor that.
Orlando Sequera: But there are multiple leadership styles.
Orlando Sequera: There's one that is direct.
Orlando Sequera: This is hierarchical when you ask the Pm. Or making all the decisions
Orlando Sequera: consultative when a leader factors in opinions, but is the one that is making decisions serve, and leadership
Orlando Sequera: super important for the Pmp. Exam. You model the desire behaviors. And again, my recommendation for the Pmp. Exam Look at every single question, for from the perspective of a server leader
Orlando Sequera: you also have consensus. Collaborative
Orlando Sequera: teams gonna operate autonomously, and situational style changes
Orlando Sequera: to fit context and material experience of the team
Orlando Sequera: differences between leadership and management. They're not the same.
Orlando Sequera: Leadership is about guiding the team with by using discussion, getting buy in from the team
Orlando Sequera: as an exchange of idea. We motive, we do that for motivation.
Orlando Sequera: but management is about authority. It's about direct connections, using a prescribe center of behaviors.
Orlando Sequera: They are not the same, however. They are not mutually exclusive. Most great managers are also great leaders. Okay, so they're not the same, but they are not also mutually exclusive. You can be a great manager. Usually great managers are also great great leaders.
Orlando Sequera: The goal here
Orlando Sequera: is to adapt your leadership styles to situations and your stakeholders, and that goes back to the organizational culture as well
Orlando Sequera: be aware of individual and team aims are working relationships within the team
Orlando Sequera: and use political awareness
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: emotional intelligence. Don't, let those emotions dictate. Your actions
Orlando Sequera: serve and leadership
Orlando Sequera: interesting. That, a couple of nights ago I was able to have a after the class. I went to dinner with a relative that serve in the military, like most of you. And this topic came up.
Orlando Sequera: I have a certain leadership, and
Orlando Sequera: he basically clarified to me
Orlando Sequera: and said that
Orlando Sequera: those of you first of all fit.
Orlando Sequera: Please thank them for for for their service. And by all means. Yeah, thank you very much for your service.
Orlando Sequera: And he said, If there's anybody that knows about servant leadership, most likely are those guys in your class that are transitioning from the military. They leave them brief, serve and leadership.
Orlando Sequera: and he ventured to say that they understand server leadership probably better than a lot of people in the in the civilian world that are in leadership positions.
Orlando Sequera: It's about putting people first to put in
Orlando Sequera: teams first putting people first. They leave and breathe that in most cases on a daily basis. So that's exactly what it is
Orlando Sequera: putting the team and the people first.
Orlando Sequera: That's
Orlando Sequera: That's what social leadership in there
Orlando Sequera: in in a nutshell is so for those of you that are transitioning.
Orlando Sequera: This is a this is some. This is the actual a paradigm that you have to follow when working with your team with your project teams, You' about server leadership. Put in the team first. It's about facilitating, removing impediments, helping them to be successful and encourage
Orlando Sequera: everything. Member and you're the role model of those desired behaviors and encourage them to also be a sermon, leaders. This is the approach and again super important for the Pmp. Exam. Look at the Pmp. Exam questions
Orlando Sequera: from the perspective of a servant leader. We're not directing. We're not telling them what to do. We are serving them, we're helping them to be successful. We're putting them, putting our people first. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: and another important aspect is adopting a growth mindset.
Orlando Sequera: We shouldn't let
Orlando Sequera: past experience and processes give you. They can provide guidance what they shouldn't Dictate your actions here.
Orlando Sequera: I also have an example from
Orlando Sequera: my situation with, working with baby Boomers and me and Genesis in the Artemis program
Orlando Sequera: at the beginning of the army's program. We had a lot, especially a lot of the the the older engineers that worked in the shorter program trying. They were always saying, Well, during shuttle days. We did it this way
Orlando Sequera: at the beginning of the program
Orlando Sequera: that was valid. We didn't have anything else to compare with. But over time
Orlando Sequera: that started to change, and I could see some animosity from special
Orlando Sequera: your engineers to say, Well, that was a shuttle. But this is a spacecraft. It's a different
Orlando Sequera: this many differences, some things are the same, but not everything is going to be the same. So we should have and adopt. And that was part of my job to start trying to
Orlando Sequera: change the paradigm and adopt
Orlando Sequera: a growth mindset. Okay, we can learn from the short program days, but that shouldn't dictate our actions. If this is a different type of spacecraft, we it's about. Let's look for better ideas, not because that's what worked in the past that should dictate the future. Okay, we can take lessons learned, but we have
Orlando Sequera: to look for continuous improvement, find for better ideas and new new perspectives, and that's how that was the approach in that specific aspect, and that worked really well. It wasn't that easy. But it worked really well.
Orlando Sequera: Team building super important.
Orlando Sequera: Do you have to work in. Try to build a cohesive unit
Orlando Sequera: that ha! Teams that
Orlando Sequera: i'm not saying that they have to be best friends. That's not what i'm saying, but they need to be able to work with each other. Well, okay, Good leadership
Orlando Sequera: facilitates this funding and try to work on team building activities. They can be formal, they can be formal. I used to bring a box of donuts and some power bars to people that didn't like to on Fridays, for example, or every once a month I had. If I had the budget. I will take my teams out to lunch.
Orlando Sequera: Figure it out. Get help from Hr.
Orlando Sequera: If you, if you don't have any ideas, or within the the constraints of your organization.
Orlando Sequera: try to work on team building. Okay, you can facilitate it, or you can have
Orlando Sequera: professional facilitators.
Orlando Sequera: and that takes us to.
Orlando Sequera: They
Orlando Sequera: document stages of team development. Second time that this is coming up. We watch a video
Orlando Sequera: on day 2 for now.
Orlando Sequera: But this is important. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: Every single team goes through the tugman ladder of team. The the talkman stages top my ladder of team development that happens to every single team. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: And by the way.
Orlando Sequera: this is.
Orlando Sequera: there is a type of question that is called match making in the Pmp. Exam, in which, on one hand, you can have a column with the different stages; and, on the other hand, you might have the definition, and the question might be to match the 2 columns. That might be one type of question that you might face in your Pmp. Exam.
Orlando Sequera: Okay. So
Orlando Sequera: make sure that you get familiarized with the talkman stages of team development. The first one is forming. This is when the team gets together for the first time
Orlando Sequera: they
Orlando Sequera: they don't know each other. They are just
Orlando Sequera: a
Orlando Sequera: usually very the very quiet. They
Orlando Sequera: They just needed each other, and everybody is trying to understand what
Orlando Sequera: what's going on with the rest of the team members
Orlando Sequera: them.
Orlando Sequera: The next stage is forming
Orlando Sequera: this. I'm sorry storming.
Orlando Sequera: This is where the team members try to
Orlando Sequera: impose their ways. Well, in my previous project we did it this way.
Orlando Sequera: and it worked.
Orlando Sequera: But you might have another team member that says Well, but in my previous project. We did it that way, and that's what worked, and you start having clash. The probabilities of having conflict here increase. So this requires a lot of oversight from you at the Pm.
Orlando Sequera: To make sure that they get out of this space of storming as quickly as possible. Okay. But it's going to happen it's going to try to take control. Remember that usually team members are highly intelligent people.
Orlando Sequera: very a smart, and their experts are their craft in most cases. So they fry. There's a control struggle
Orlando Sequera: A. And that's just just human nature. They go through that. So your goal is to help the team to navigate the storm in face, so they can get out of it as quickly as possible, because then, after the storm there comes to come.
Orlando Sequera: and that will be the Norman State. This is where the team starts.
Orlando Sequera: Okay, understand a little bit more about the different working styles, and to start to accept a little more start to work together a little bit better. The level of trust increases
Orlando Sequera: and things start. They. The level of productivity also increases, because in formula storming is very low. This is when the level of productivity starts to increase.
Orlando Sequera: Then you get to performing. That is the ideal stage, because teams have reached the level of performing.
Orlando Sequera: They are a whale, all machine
Orlando Sequera: that this is.
Orlando Sequera: This is the the the Nirvana for any project manager, because this is where you see people that are it. They can pretty much complete their sentences. They're aligned
Orlando Sequera: any. If there's a challenge that comes up, they they're proactively going to tackle it, and they communicate well with each other, and they they resolve any conflicts on their own if they come to fruition. And you just.
Orlando Sequera: you have to be a a super server leader. When it comes to the State, just cater to them, let them drive it to success. That is the best. if it's the best feeling that support manager to be able to get to the performance stage. But, as we know, projects come to an end.
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: and then team members that complete their activities.
Orlando Sequera: They are going to be adjourned, and that's what happens in a journey. They, when they complete their work, they move to the next project, and that happens. So that's why we have the 5 stages. Make sure that you know this for the exam, and make sure that
Orlando Sequera: You're familiar with this, you might be wondering what happens if we have an and this could also very well be a a a type of question in your exam what happens in
Orlando Sequera: the event of a new team member. You are in the performing stage. But then there is a change in the team and a new team memory is added to the team will.
Orlando Sequera: Unfortunately, what happens is that this is going to reset You're going to go back to forming. If you make changes to the team. It goes back to forming, so it's your job to make sure that you get out of that forming and storming faces as quickly as possible.
Orlando Sequera: Put any changes to the team that's gonna drive it's gonna reset the clock, and you're gonna go back to forming. Okay, that's what happens
Orlando Sequera: a little bit more about
Orlando Sequera: balance the team tone with sense of urgency. We're leading, but of course we have to drive
Orlando Sequera: our team to completion to complete the tasks. So
Orlando Sequera: always in a positive environment, with a positive connotation, you as fluid communication and promote positive interactions as much as possible, but emphasize the sense of urgency that is important. And how do we do that with the vision and values, making sure that people are committed
Orlando Sequera: because we great power comes great responsibility and try to
Orlando Sequera: Make sure that people understand the importance of the work that is being done. You have to convey that message. So this has to be a balance with the tone and the sense of urgency
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to
Orlando Sequera: the virtual teams is a little bit more challenging. It's not that simple You're going to have. It requires a little bit more oversight to keep them engaged, but
Orlando Sequera: we're contain dynamics. Be on top of them. Make sure that you a address them. Their needs that they don't feel isolated.
Orlando Sequera: use effective communication. There are multiple tools that you can use nowadays for participants.
Orlando Sequera: and even If you're using a video conferencing tool, try to have the camera on, so you can measure body, language and the tone and the expressions that might help you to understand how they're feeling, so it requires
Orlando Sequera: a little bit more oversight, but it is possible, and then use the tools that are available
Orlando Sequera: like Cameron style boards. If you're using an agent approach so they can. So
Orlando Sequera: they were a.
Orlando Sequera: Because visible. The work status is visible, and they can ask for help if they need to.
Orlando Sequera: some of the best practices with virtual teams.
Orlando Sequera: Make sure that with your oversight with your constant communication, you address that possible risk of
Orlando Sequera: team members feeling isolated.
Orlando Sequera: Make sure that you reinforce the message that is about the team. So for those of you in the military, you know this way better than me. It's about the team goals. It's not about individual accomplishment is
Orlando Sequera: the in, and that's how stakeholders Look at you. It's about the team. They don't look at the individual. They look at the project team. So focus on shared commitments, and if they're not doing that work, make sure that you understand that that's gonna have an impact on all their team members. So it's about a share commitment and make sure that you drive that message home.
Orlando Sequera: And
Orlando Sequera: this is what we have covered so far.
Orlando Sequera: So we started covering the first topics about leading the team.
Orlando Sequera: We talked about several liter
Orlando Sequera: super important for the exam. Again. Look at the questions from the perspective of a servant leader. Determine which is the Taylor, the leadership style that you're going to follow.
Orlando Sequera: And also look at the different options that you have to lead
Orlando Sequera: team members and stakeholders. Okay, lead not man, actually. And also make sure that you, if you're working a virtual setting, then that you have a way to support your virtual, a teams as well.
Orlando Sequera: And that takes us to
Orlando Sequera: creating a collaborative project team environment. Okay. So we're gonna look at best practices
Orlando Sequera: to make sure that the work can happen
Orlando Sequera: smoothly. Okay, we're gonna go over some how to create a structure for physical and which are working. That's what we mean by environment, including workspace management, project, artifact document, creation and configuration management. Some things that some of you have mentioned before. But that's part of project management.
Orlando Sequera: When it comes to environment, we need to find where
Orlando Sequera: and how the team is gonna work
Orlando Sequera: co-location. And by that I mean having everyone on the same in the same physical space
Orlando Sequera: and within 6 feet of each other that is, if at all possible. That is the best way. But it's not always possible. Okay? And why is it
Orlando Sequera: option? Because that helps with communication that helps with interaction. Information flows freely in the
Orlando Sequera: it helps in many aspects, but it's not always possible. So you have to take into account the environment and location
Orlando Sequera: 14 performance, and always always always foster. This is one of your main responsibilities. As as the project manager foster that meaningful interaction to support teams autonomy, and
Orlando Sequera: going back to something that we worked on. We created those we wrote that team charter with the ground Rules respect those agreements, respect the agreed team. Working hours and practices go back to the ground rules that were created by the team
Orlando Sequera: a following collaborative approach.
Orlando Sequera: When it comes to agile space for hybrid teams.
Orlando Sequera: you should also take this into account. And the environment is also applicable, regardless of the approach.
Orlando Sequera: Create a team space that helps with
Orlando Sequera: but just co-location if at all possible, but at least collaboration.
Orlando Sequera: communication, transparency, and visibility
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to transparency what we're really saying, and and this is super important. This is one of the pillars of
Orlando Sequera: the empirical process is about transparency, inspection, and adaptability, and is also about visibility. And this is where tools, like
Orlando Sequera: Jira, for example, when you can create a dashboard for your project, and people can see the status of the work.
Orlando Sequera: Give everyone the access that they need to, so they can understand what's going on with our project. So we're talking about agile projects. Right? So that's why we create it could be a Camden board or some sort of type of information that shows the status of the work, and
Orlando Sequera: in that information radiator is multiple columns. We have the list of
Orlando Sequera: features or Use of stories that are in the to-do list. This is these are the features that are in the to do list. These are the features that are being worked on right now in the iteration. These are the user stories or features that are being tested. These are the user stories or features that are blocked.
Orlando Sequera: and these are the user. Stories or features that are
Orlando Sequera: Don.
Orlando Sequera: Okay. So that is
Orlando Sequera: how we can be transparent using those tools if we're following an agile approach.
Orlando Sequera: Another important aspect that I have mentioned before is to take into account that we have tools that can help us to
Orlando Sequera: a share this information and and manage our projects. So Pms. That stands for project management information system. The best example is Microsoft Project
Orlando Sequera: to be a very popular tool for project management.
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: this is where we can build our schedule, our budget, a assign our resources, calculate the quicker path. They can help us with all of that, and we can integrate all the project data
Orlando Sequera: mainly use for
Orlando Sequera: predicted projects. I would say Microsoft Mexico Project.
Orlando Sequera: But we also have other tools like Jira, a trello.
Orlando Sequera: a version, one
Orlando Sequera: team foundation server or Microsoft that can help you better if you're following an agile approach. But you have
Orlando Sequera: multiple tools that can help you, regardless of the approach.
Orlando Sequera: and you also have.
Orlando Sequera: in order to manage all and store and manage and control all those documents and artifacts that we are creating. We also have artifacts, management systems in place. The best example is Microsoft sharepoint or team or teams that actually is integrated with sharepoint or other options like Google drive.
Orlando Sequera: so we can have repositories for documents.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to the importance of artifacts.
Orlando Sequera: artifacts are going to enable it to enable us to reconstruct the history of the project, these documents that we are creating for us to manage our project, and
Orlando Sequera: we're going to be able to create multiple artifacts at Wbs: the Rbs.
Orlando Sequera: And a lot of documentation. Brace registers take all the register. They project charter, multiple, but they are important, and they're gonna need a They're gonna we need them in order to manage our projects. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: all right. And when it comes to information storage
Orlando Sequera: some of the guidance that are for recommendations, select an accessible location within the constraints that your organization has right. If your organization uses Microsoft teams, for example, a integrated with sharepoint
Orlando Sequera: use that
Orlando Sequera: you don't have to go and ask for. Well, we should use Google drive because I like Google better. No. You use what is available within the organization. Select an accessible location. If you're following an agile approach, as I mentioned, use an information radiator.
Orlando Sequera: That is a graphic representation of the status of the work. So anyone that would like to understand the status of your project, can look at the information radiator and understand what the status of the the project is.
Orlando Sequera: A. Again, the storage and distribution system should match the complexity of your project. There's some very high tech and very involved in
Orlando Sequera: production distribution solutions out there, and
Orlando Sequera: if you're working with teams that are in different your graphical locations.
Orlando Sequera: one recommendation is to use cloud-based systems for larger projects, which is becoming more and more prevalent nowadays.
Orlando Sequera: When it comes to
Orlando Sequera: the artifacts.
Orlando Sequera: we should be efficient in the way we create them
Orlando Sequera: we should use. That's why it's so important to rely
Orlando Sequera: on the Pmo. So we follow standardized formats and templates. So we don't have to reinvent the wheel every single time, and by that I mean in every single project are going to. I'm going to recreate from Scratch. How am I going to create how to create the Risk Register? No. This should be a standard. You shouldn't have to waste any time
Orlando Sequera: on figuring out how to create the risk Register should be available.
Orlando Sequera: If
Orlando Sequera: if the organization is new to project management practices. Yes, by all means you're gonna have to work from scratch in that situation. But if your organization has templates in place, use them, and that's gonna help with the structure process for review and approval of those documents follow that
Orlando Sequera: standardized approach. And, more importantly, it's also going to help you with version control, because.
Orlando Sequera: with the exception of the project charter, these documents and artifacts are living documents, meaning that they're going to be changing throughout the project, and also security aspect, because not everybody needs to have access to every single document. Some of them, like the financials of the project, are. Do you need to control the access for that. And
Orlando Sequera: also we to be able to have this system in place that can help us to send the documents when needed. So timely distribution of documents.
Orlando Sequera: We should
Orlando Sequera: taylor this tailoring, this artifacts that is.
Orlando Sequera: this is
Orlando Sequera: This is a typical list. It's not exclusive or prescriptive, but this is a typical list and
Orlando Sequera: the Pm. And the team they're gonna
Orlando Sequera: select. They write artifacts to use on their specific project, and they should have the flexibility to tailor this specific artifacts for their project.
Orlando Sequera: You're not you. You're not going to use every single process, every single input to the tool and technique that we have covered in every single project. But these are the typical ones that you're going to be using for predicted projects. We're going to have
Orlando Sequera: company management plan.
Orlando Sequera: We're going to have a project. Charter. Change requests, scope, baseline schedule based on cost, baseline, and all the different subsidiary plans one.
Orlando Sequera: But for
Orlando Sequera: add your projects and hybrid projects. We have
Orlando Sequera: a project management plan as well, a product, roadmap task force, experiments for backlog and spring backlog. But we can also have an agile
Orlando Sequera: project. Charter. So
Orlando Sequera: this is not. This is the typical ones, but they are not exclusive or prescriptive that can change. We can have a an agile project, charter as well, but they need to be tailored to your specific project.
Orlando Sequera: And this artifacts. As I said.
Orlando Sequera: they're going to be evolving over time.
Orlando Sequera: We have to maintain this the keep track of those changes, and for that we have to have in place a configuration management plan that can help us to understand how changes, how product information is going to be recorded and updated in this different artifacts.
Orlando Sequera: because changes in the scope that's gonna touch multiple errors, not just the scope you're gonna have to.
Orlando Sequera: Chances. Are You're gonna have to change your schedule, changed your budget.
Orlando Sequera: change your resources, etc. So you got to have a configuration management plan that can help you to track those changes, and also a as a system, a configuration management system to
Orlando Sequera: practice changes, monitor these changes and control these changes to these artifacts.
Orlando Sequera: A super important aspect
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to configuration. Management is also version control.
Orlando Sequera: But
Orlando Sequera: nowadays most of the even, the the most common systems like sharepoint. For example, they this is pretty much standard functionality. They create a new version number for you. They put a date time a day timestamp, and also
Orlando Sequera: they keep track of the last user that made the changes. But this is really important, because you need to make sure that you're working with the most up to date version of those artifacts at all times.
Orlando Sequera: Okay, super super super important.
Orlando Sequera: It's a system that
Orlando Sequera: it's gonna record changes in a file that allows users to make changes as needed
Orlando Sequera: in.
Orlando Sequera: We have cover
Orlando Sequera: for the card effects.
Orlando Sequera: We talked about the requirements. What when we're in, Who for managing public artifacts and validate that this work, information is kept under control.
Orlando Sequera: we cover all the content for the first section.
Orlando Sequera: And now i'm going to address some of the questions until we still have a few minutes before we go and break. So what i'm gonna do is i'm gonna take the time to address some of the questions in the Q. A. Section.
Orlando Sequera: Please make sure that you vote on the on those questions.
Okay.
Orlando Sequera: One question
Orlando Sequera: in the Ito understands for impulse students at the nicks and outputs of the PIN book the pretty much, and plans using the input of other plans. That's what we're saying here with integration.
Orlando Sequera: as we're saying here with integration. So
Orlando Sequera: a but developing the also requires other plan outputs as an input. Well, we've been talking about the subsidiary plans, but they all need to come together. That happens in integration and the outcome
Orlando Sequera: the output
Orlando Sequera: in integration. The main output is going to be
Orlando Sequera: the project management plan.
Orlando Sequera: Another question with an organization's, collections of lessons learned be considered an opa. Yes, and that's what we call lessons learned repository.
Orlando Sequera: How close are the practic sense to real extent very close
Orlando Sequera: The test Prep. Questions are very close.
Orlando Sequera: Another question regarding my apologies
Orlando Sequera: regarding the weather in the desert representing
Orlando Sequera: an unplanned risk UN identified risk.
Orlando Sequera: We're in the Pmp Process team book. If there, if anywhere, does it refer to basic steps in a more bullet point form. What? When in that situation, would you escalate the on plan? Risk as an issue? Well, first of all, you can plan for it.
Orlando Sequera: do you?
Orlando Sequera: The answer to that is going to be? You have to use management reserves.
Orlando Sequera: and what
Orlando Sequera: Pmi is recommending this to look is to review the project management
Orlando Sequera: to really prevention plan specifically the chapter of the
Orlando Sequera: Risk management plan. That's what they're telling you. Okay, that's why we created Those are the rules that we're going to follow to address
Orlando Sequera: risk.
Orlando Sequera: Okay, and you're gonna have to use management reserves. But you need authorization for that. You can't. You don't have the 30 as a Pm. To use
Orlando Sequera: Project a
Orlando Sequera: management reserves. You need authorization for that contingency reserves. You have authorization. You don't need to ask for permission to use contingency reserves.
Orlando Sequera: Another question: what should we do as a Pm. To take team from one step to another, oversight mentoring, coaching.
Orlando Sequera: and using servant leadership.
Okay.
Orlando Sequera: Is there a timeframe for each stage of talk when faces of them building? No.
Orlando Sequera: that there's not a set timeframe for that?
Orlando Sequera: Why is this just for agile? You will have to give a little bit more context in your question.
Orlando Sequera: Covid is forcing many teams to move to virtual have percent of unique Chinese to manager. Yes, and we're giving you best
Orlando Sequera: practices to address that situation. But that's true statement.
Orlando Sequera: Him
Orlando Sequera: I would have thought that risk log will have been on the list of Taylor artifacts. I know it is in a completely. We would have thought that it risk risk register.
Orlando Sequera: Well, yes, it is an artifact that needs to be tailored, that is. yes.
Orlando Sequera: how can we fat another question. How can we fast track the team for talkman. There's no that. There's a silver bullet that work.
Orlando Sequera: Work with them
Orlando Sequera: a oversight and work with them and be at leader. Be a servant leader for your team last.
Orlando Sequera: But there's not a magic answer for that.
so
Orlando Sequera: okay, will the requirements for civilizations Consider a configuration management system for artifacts. It's part of it. Yes, it's one of those artifacts that you have to maintain. So yeah.
Orlando Sequera: in real life, working environments do project managers have access to a suite of template resources to ensure. They have all the products, plans, etc., needed to go forward with the project. Yes, and the name of that is a Project Management office.
Orlando Sequera: Pmo.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: What is the print? That's an iteration? It's a time box
Orlando Sequera: timeframe in which the team is gonna work on developing features
Orlando Sequera: get an opportunity to become a threat. a positive re becoming a negative risk.
Orlando Sequera: It could happen, but it's not common.
Orlando Sequera: I don't really have an
Orlando Sequera: an example that I can think of. But
Orlando Sequera: my take is that you're kind of overthinking it a little bit.
Orlando Sequera: Negative risks. You need to identify them, analyze them and
Orlando Sequera: come up with a response. Positive risk the same. And that's what we need to make sure that we know for the exempt. But i'm not ruling that possibility. I'm sure it is possible
Orlando Sequera: a predictive approach is more likely to be for risk. Adverse situations.
Orlando Sequera: I'm. Sorry
Orlando Sequera: and agile, is more for seeking situation. Not necessarily. Not necessarily. No, I wouldn't. I wouldn't go by that. A predictive approach is better. Look at this scope. A predictive approach is better in situations. In this, when the scope is well defined, and when or well understood.
Orlando Sequera: and an adaptive approach works better in situations; and we just in which the scope is very complex.
Orlando Sequera: for
Orlando Sequera: if we know, going in that he has.
Orlando Sequera: that is going to be a lot of changes. Look at it from the scope perspective, not from the risk perspective. That is my
Orlando Sequera: my recommendation.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: how can we keep
Orlando Sequera: team members in track
Orlando Sequera: of performing stage One new member, when new team member joins. You're going to go back to
Orlando Sequera: they
Orlando Sequera: to forming. Unfortunately, it's the clocks gonna be reset. So you have to work with your team to make sure that they get out of it as quickly as possible. But it's gonna be
Orlando Sequera: It's going to be a reset, and it's going to go back to a
Orlando Sequera: is going to go back to to forming
Orlando Sequera: a therapy, and my library would probably document templates. Yeah, I mentioned that multiple times. It is Www. Dot project management.com
Orlando Sequera: the difference between Pmo. And P. 3 M. I don't know what P. 3 M. Stands for, so
Orlando Sequera: I don't know.
Orlando Sequera: How do you deal with a disruptive team member? We're not talking about that When we get to conflict management.
Orlando Sequera: what which leadership that is best, Our leadership staff serve and leadership
Orlando Sequera: all right. So
Orlando Sequera: I
Orlando Sequera: think that most of the Content related questions have been addressed, and we are ready for our break
Orlando Sequera: i'm gonna take a one-hour break. Please remember, do not log off.
Orlando Sequera: We are going to be playing important videos.
Orlando Sequera: Our mentors are going to play important videos.
Orlando Sequera: and we'll be back in an hour. Okay, enjoy your break. Thank you very much, and we'll do it again when we come back. Enjoy your break
Orlando Sequera: all right, Welcome back everyone
Orlando Sequera: hopefully. You enjoyed your
Orlando Sequera: your break.
Orlando Sequera: and we're going to continue with our
Orlando Sequera: with part 2 of session number 4.
Orlando Sequera: I was reviewing briefly
Orlando Sequera: the Q. And a and didn't really see any content related
Orlando Sequera: questions.
Orlando Sequera: So we're gonna continue with our
Orlando Sequera: with our
Orlando Sequera: content, and we'll have
Orlando Sequera: some stopping points after we cover some of the topics to address
Orlando Sequera: the questions that you might have. Alright, so the next topic that we're going to be covering
Orlando Sequera: is how to empower the team. So remember that we are working out less on Number 4 is about how to lead the team, how to work with the people. This content is
Orlando Sequera: a mainly related
Orlando Sequera: to the people domain. Member. That's one of the domains that you have to cover for the Pmp. Exam. We have 3. We have people domain. That accounts for 42 of the questions. So this content is really important. Almost half of the questions are going to be related to
Orlando Sequera: this specific domain people domain. Then
Orlando Sequera: we have the process domain which we have covered all those different areas in planning and all the different areas of your project, and mainly that is part of the process domain. That accounts for 50 of the questions, and then something that we cover mainly day, one which is business environment. That is the third.
Orlando Sequera: and probably that's the new addition for this version of the Pmp. Exam. That accounts for 8% of the questions
Orlando Sequera: in your Pmp. Exempt
Orlando Sequera: all right, so empowering the team.
Orlando Sequera: This is critical.
Orlando Sequera: A empowering the team, and
Orlando Sequera: this, mainly started with Agile, is part of the agile mindset.
Orlando Sequera: But
Orlando Sequera: it is so powerful, useful, and helps teams
Orlando Sequera: to be successful that he has
Orlando Sequera: and made its way to hybrid approaches, and also to predictive approaches in which
Orlando Sequera: that benefit from empower team members that can help project team project managers in making the best decisions possible for the project is basically boils down to
Orlando Sequera: letting the teams.
Orlando Sequera: It take a more active role in the decision making process, not just relying on
Orlando Sequera: on on the Pm. Leveraging that expertise that comes from
Orlando Sequera: a
Orlando Sequera: doing the work which is, which is what the team members do.
Orlando Sequera: Right? So
Orlando Sequera: it is in our context is, the the idea should be
Orlando Sequera: to create an environment where individual team members are empowered to
Orlando Sequera: tribute with their ideas. Okay, we should foster that collaboration.
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: is to share a little bit about empowering teams with emotional intelligence and fluid communication.
Orlando Sequera: The
Orlando Sequera: this is
Orlando Sequera: a case study
Orlando Sequera: in 26
Orlando Sequera: after years of finalizing interviews and data from more than a 100 different teams.
Orlando Sequera: Google Researchers found that the drivers of effective team performance are the group's average level of emotional intelligence and a high degree communication between members. So
Orlando Sequera: with this we're trying to say that there is some data
Orlando Sequera: behind the importance of empowering teams. Even if we are following a predictive approach
Orlando Sequera: and also
Orlando Sequera: a the level of communication. So that's why this 2 topics are coming more and more and more to the forefront because they have an impact on effective team performance. There's a lot of research that has been done in this regard, and this is becoming more and more more the normal.
Orlando Sequera: Okay?
Orlando Sequera: And
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to
Orlando Sequera: empowerment team, uni, team, unity and autonomy. Those are
Orlando Sequera: characteristics that Amy High performing team
Orlando Sequera: shoot.
Orlando Sequera: cultivate, regardless of the setting
Orlando Sequera: that is
Orlando Sequera: it that is extremely important
Orlando Sequera: people
Orlando Sequera: are going to contribute
Orlando Sequera: their best
Orlando Sequera: when
Orlando Sequera: they they feel proud of what they do, and that they, when they feel empower.
Orlando Sequera: Okay. But
Orlando Sequera: with great power comes great responsibility. it's like quote from a movie. Probably some of you might
Orlando Sequera: picking it
Orlando Sequera: with great power. Come, comes comes great responsibility. So we're giving you more power. We're trusting you in and being part of the decision making process, but it's also increasing the level of responsibility.
Orlando Sequera: The team needs to be in power to make decisions in a collaborative way.
Orlando Sequera: and this is going to help you with motivation. This is going to help you with increase it. That increasing that sense of unity.
Orlando Sequera: and is also
Orlando Sequera: going to help with the decision making process. We keep saying that we should involve them, we should involve. And this is how we do it by given them
Orlando Sequera: the power, and
Orlando Sequera: they that they are part of the process. If you are able to follow this approach
Orlando Sequera: you, Chances are you're going to be. Increase the the level of success in your project in the way you're working with a team a
Orlando Sequera: in agile. As I mentioned before, this is a must. But
Orlando Sequera: given the fact that high performing teams, regardless of the approach this has been, this has been proven to be successful. It's becoming more and more common. Amen. Even in predictive approaches, and of course, in hybrid approaches. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: the team recognizes the power and the influence as as an empower cohesive unit. That's the goal. That's how we can reach that talkman later stage of
Orlando Sequera: performing.
Orlando Sequera: This is gonna help with the decision making process, and also with a problem solving process as well.
Orlando Sequera: Okay, given them the power giving them responsibility and prioritizing team unity over individual contributions.
Orlando Sequera: I am a 100% sure that for those of you that come from the military. This is the first time you see this. But this is a night translation of your skill. Set that you learn in the in the military life. Now you can use those principles, and they translate nicely into your civilian life.
Orlando Sequera: All right.
Orlando Sequera: Another aspect.
Orlando Sequera: We have to support diversity. As we said, most teams are going to be diverse nowadays. It's about equity means about inclusion. Empowering teams of as a cohesive unit. But that also means that we're going to respect the individuals with respect
Orlando Sequera: their culture that we're going to respect diversity. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: we have to create an an environment in which people feel safe to express their opinions. But we're taking into account their the diversity, their culture. It's about respect. Let's go back to the values right. Starting with respect, we have to support it through some of our building initiatives and
Orlando Sequera: collaborative culture in
Orlando Sequera: acting and leading with empathy when we take into account others we care of our other people.
Orlando Sequera: That means that we also have to work on creating that
Orlando Sequera: psychological safety
Orlando Sequera: in order to embrace diversity.
Orlando Sequera: That is really important. So we easier set than done this. This is something that
Orlando Sequera: working it's gonna
Orlando Sequera: It's going to be. It takes a lot of effort, but it's possible we should strive to achieve
Orlando Sequera: it.
Orlando Sequera: The the environment in which the team members feel
Orlando Sequera: safe enough to express their opinions.
Orlando Sequera: they feel safe enough to express their ideas without thinking or fearing, let alone retaliation. So we have to promote a healthy work, environment. Basically it's about embracing Diversity
Orlando Sequera: Building Trust with your team members with one another, and keeping the the decision making process, keeping those ethical principles following that code of ethics at all times. So people should feel comfortable being who they are at work. That's what we're trying to say.
Orlando Sequera: but that takes us to another arena, in which
Orlando Sequera: It means that we we need to understand. People need to understand people a little bit more, and there is a lot of research that has been done
Orlando Sequera: in that arena, and that's what we call motivational theories.
Orlando Sequera: A:
Orlando Sequera: It is important to work at least.
Orlando Sequera: having an idea of this a general idea of this, this different motivational theories to understand People's behavior. That's that's the goal that you get for understanding these different motivational theories that have been around for a long time. It's not something new.
Orlando Sequera: It is a standard knowledge area for any business practitioner, not just for project managers.
Orlando Sequera: but we can benefit from understanding what motivates people in the organization that because we're working with people from day one we start saying, you're going to be. You're going to be working with your protein, Mem: correcting members that are diverse. You're going to be working with stakeholders. You're going to be working with multiple people. So it is a good idea to also understand
Orlando Sequera: how what motivates different people, and is. Take a look at this different theories that are going to help us to understand that we're going to start with massless pyramid of
Orlando Sequera: the hierarchy of meat myths.
Orlando Sequera: We have Hersburg's a motivation. Hygiene Theory Mcgregor's X and Y. Theory X. And Y. And by Cleveland's achievement motivation theory. Okay
Orlando Sequera: for.
Orlando Sequera: And whenever I see this slide, this brings me back to my college years.
it
Orlando Sequera: Abraham Maslow. He came up with this long time ago a over 70 years ago.
Orlando Sequera: And this basically
Orlando Sequera: is he he grouped the human, the human needs into these 5 categories. That is also known as the hierarchy of needs or mass Rose permit. It is Abraham Maslow.
Orlando Sequera: and really helps to understand
Orlando Sequera: what
Orlando Sequera: it really helps in understanding people. So we start with the bottom of the pyramid.
Orlando Sequera: The physiological needs are the basic elements that any human being needs in order to leave. And we're talking about
Orlando Sequera: food, water, sleep.
Orlando Sequera: air.
Orlando Sequera: etc. So those are the physiological needs there at the bottom of the pyramid.
Orlando Sequera: Okay, then, the next level is safety. Those are
Orlando Sequera: the items that I that any person needs to feel safe from physical and economic harm.
Orlando Sequera: The next level
Orlando Sequera: is about
Orlando Sequera: belonging or social needs, and this is the desire that any human being has to in order to be part of a group or receive affection and
Orlando Sequera: feel that
Orlando Sequera: belonging, feel that they're part of something that's belonging. Then we have steam. This has to do with recognition received from mothers as well as with Selfs team.
Orlando Sequera: and they
Orlando Sequera: top of the permit we have
Orlando Sequera: the self-actualization. These are the desires that in any individual has about self-fulfilling and developing to the full potential.
Orlando Sequera: So you might be wondering great. This is a theory. How is this
Orlando Sequera: applicable to
Orlando Sequera: project management working with the project team and even working with stakeholders? Well.
Orlando Sequera: if you start seeing, for example.
Orlando Sequera: a project
Orlando Sequera: team member that is starting to the performance is not where it should be, and it starts to
Orlando Sequera: The performance starts to, software and you see that the person
Orlando Sequera: normally it's very it's it's always communicating. Very active. Is someone that is really on top of things you start seeing. Maybe there is something that is happening that one of these levels, maybe at the safety level, because you need to. It's about performance right? So as a good project manager. You want to reach out to the
Orlando Sequera: to the team member to try to understand what's going on
Orlando Sequera: right. It's not a immediately going and using disciplinary sanctions. That's not the way we want to work with. People try to understand where they're coming from, and this is one way, maybe something at the
Orlando Sequera: safety need. Maybe they're having some financial problems, or they having some going through some personal situations and try to understand that where they're coming from and try to find a way to help them. So that is where a massless pyramid can help us. A. Because if any of these levels, specially going
Orlando Sequera: at the ones at the bottom are being affected. That's going to have an impact on the performance of the team members. So we can use this to understand possible
Orlando Sequera: problems that might have in that might be a current within your with your team members. So it's one way. We also have motivation hygiene theory, and this is about.
Orlando Sequera: A
Orlando Sequera: We have hygiene factors.
Orlando Sequera: and we have motivators.
Orlando Sequera: So
Orlando Sequera: it's also known as the two-factor theory.
Orlando Sequera: The hygiene factors relate to working conditions a stable job a good relationship with management and co-workers, and then motivating factors relate to the feelings of achievement recognition and career advancement. Ideally they should be a balance
Orlando Sequera: and this changes from individual to individual. But when it comes to hygiene issues according to herstworks, by the way, you cannot motivate employees, but you can minimize this satisfaction. If it's handled properly, they can only dissatisfied if
Orlando Sequera: if they are absent or mishandled
Orlando Sequera: hygiene topics, they cover company policies, supervision salary interpersonal relations, working conditions, any issues related to the employees environment. But what we have in in the far right, the motivators that's a little bit different.
Orlando Sequera: They create satisfaction by fulfilling individual needs or meaning and personal growth.
Orlando Sequera: They are issues like
Orlando Sequera: achievement, recognition, the work itself, engagement, responsibility, and advancement.
Orlando Sequera: Once the hygiene errors are addressed, then the motivators are going to promote job satisfaction and encourage productivity.
Orlando Sequera: That's according to her experts.
Orlando Sequera: We also have Mcgregor's theory, X and
Orlando Sequera: theory. Why?
Orlando Sequera: So
Orlando Sequera: 2 theories? And this is
Orlando Sequera: also
Orlando Sequera: something that we can use to understand. What type of management do we have to work with, and it's a good way to understand that
Orlando Sequera: you are going to find managers, and this is, according to Mcgregor's, by the way, in the has that did a lot of work in this field of social psychology and understanding people's, behaviors, and organizations.
Orlando Sequera: There are some managers that follow the theory X approach.
Orlando Sequera: They are
Orlando Sequera: pessimists when it comes to people's behavior.
Orlando Sequera: and they think that most people don't like to work, and they avoid work.
Orlando Sequera: and they think that people avoiding free responsibility
Orlando Sequera: and based on their belief, they follow that carrot and stick approach in which
Orlando Sequera: people need to be directed. Okay, that's what we call an authoritarian.
Orlando Sequera: But there are some other managers is that are basically the opposite right? They They are the theory. Why
Orlando Sequera: type of managers, and this is people. They think that people want to work and enjoy it.
Orlando Sequera: And management doesn't need to to to micromanage what they do, and constantly super supervise.
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: a people are looking for satisfaction, and they are Look, they don't require that much direction. Okay. So some people tend to think of this as theory X: that's all school. That's the old way of doing things. And then theory. Why, it's a little bit more modern. No, necessarily. You're going to find this
Orlando Sequera: in organizations that these 2 coexist, so it's one way for us to to decipher a the management style of some managers that we're working with in our projects.
Orlando Sequera: Then we have Mac
Orlando Sequera: achievement, motivation
Orlando Sequera: theory.
Orlando Sequera: and according to Mcclelland, he says that an individual
Orlando Sequera: needs are shaped by their experiences, what they go through
Orlando Sequera: and depending on culture and life experiences. And he says that there are 3 needs.
Orlando Sequera: and one becomes dominant in our personalities
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: effective project managers. They need to know how to motivate each type of individual and try to find some balance. Okay. So
Orlando Sequera: the 3
Orlando Sequera: categories
Orlando Sequera: for these achievement motivation theory of Mclean are
Orlando Sequera: achievement, the first one.
Orlando Sequera: the If an individual has a high need for achievement. This is someone that has a strong set, a strong need to accomplish challenging goals.
Orlando Sequera: They take calculated risks
Orlando Sequera: to accomplish their their goals, and also they like to receive regular feedback on the progress and achievements, and they like to work alone in most cases. So.
Orlando Sequera: if they have an high need for achievement, those are the characteristics of someone that has a high need for achievement. Then the second one is affiliation.
Orlando Sequera: People that
Orlando Sequera: one to feel that they belong to a group.
Orlando Sequera: They want to be liked.
Orlando Sequera: and by the rest of the people they favor collaboration over competition, and they don't like high risk or uncertainty, and then we have
Orlando Sequera: power people to have a high need for power. These are people that want to control and influence others.
Orlando Sequera: They enjoy competition and winning.
Orlando Sequera: They enjoyed their status on recognition, and they like to win arguments.
Orlando Sequera: Usually good managers. They tend to have a high need for power.
Orlando Sequera: and I need for achievement and affiliation. It's going to be at the bottom. They don't. They're okay, not being well liked by others, They're okay with that. But we have other people that have a higher need for affiliation. They usually don't make the best managers.
Orlando Sequera: So that's another way to understand how people, but they ideally they should be a violence, right? We we should try to find
Orlando Sequera: a balance, and
Orlando Sequera: we should use this intel
Orlando Sequera: to craft roles around team members strength. Okay, so we can balance it out as much as possible in our project team.
Orlando Sequera: Another important aspect that we have to take into account in leading the team is.
Orlando Sequera: besides the theories. The theories are going to help us to understand people, but this is something that we have mentioned before. This is also going to help us to
Orlando Sequera: a leader teams is to make sure that those
Orlando Sequera: they those ground rules that we created in our with our team charter
Orlando Sequera: with the team following a collaborative approach our
Orlando Sequera: actually used are being used. So we gotta make sure that that's the case.
Orlando Sequera: Then
Orlando Sequera: do we have them visible? Is everybody aware of the fact? We're so everybody familiar with the location of the team charter containing the team ground rules.
Orlando Sequera: Do we need to update any other rules because there have there have been changes in in.
Orlando Sequera: in the environment, in the team setting.
Orlando Sequera: If we have meeting members, have they been
Orlando Sequera: communicated about the team charter and the ground rules that we have to follow in order to work as a team. That's important. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: So remember what we said before
Orlando Sequera: with the Tuckman ladder. Whenever we add.
Orlando Sequera: whenever there's a change in the team, meaning that we have new team members a that are brought to the team.
Orlando Sequera: Then we reset the clock. We go back, even if we're in performing, we go back to forming.
Orlando Sequera: And as project managers, we have to work with the team
Orlando Sequera: a lot of close, and we have to to work with them closely.
Orlando Sequera: in order to make sure that they
Orlando Sequera: they get out of those 2 stages as we as possible for me, and storming as quickly as possible, and they get to at least norming
Orlando Sequera: in a timely manner. I remember seeing some questions in the Q. A. About is there a timeframe for to get out of the forming stage or the storming stage? No, that changes from from team to team, even within the same organization, because every project is different and and the predict teams are different. So no, there's not a a a timeframe for that. But the guidelines to
Orlando Sequera: as quickly as possible. We should move from from one stage to another as quickly as possible. Okay. And
Orlando Sequera: in the event of a rule being violated or broken.
Orlando Sequera: we have to
Orlando Sequera: ensure that the right response is applied.
Orlando Sequera: We have to remind
Orlando Sequera: individuals about
Orlando Sequera: mutual agreements we all created. If we start seeing that someone, for example, is taking longer to answer a
Orlando Sequera: voice. Mails that were left, or is showing up late for meetings Remind them about the mutual agreement. Remember, we set these rules as a team. You were part of that process. So we have all of us. We have to follow this rules, but at the Pm. You have
Orlando Sequera: an extra, an extra step to take, which is as a servant leader. You have to be also a role model that's part of being a servant leader. So
Orlando Sequera: if you show up to late late to those meetings, and you don't really have
Orlando Sequera: it's not really going to work right. So you you can ask
Orlando Sequera: for for something that you are not fulfilling or following. So you have to be early, for the meetings. Follow these rules. Be a role model. That's contagious, that it's gonna they? They're going to be paying close attention to your behavior. So you gotta watch that. I'll act
Orlando Sequera: accordingly at all times. Okay, the team members are watching. So
Orlando Sequera: if it also it's about coaching.
Orlando Sequera: talking to them, understanding why, what's going on? Why are they showing up showing up late for for meetings all the time. Right? So
Orlando Sequera: talk to them, coach them. You serve a leadership.
Orlando Sequera: Listen to them, but in some cases.
Orlando Sequera: and I remember seeing some questions about that. What do we do if we have an extremely disruptive team member that is
Orlando Sequera: violating fl flagrantly. These ground rules, then, in that event. If, then you can, then sanctions can, can can be the super. Many actions can be used. Usually you work with the Hr Department if it gets to that point it can happen hopefully. It's not something common.
Orlando Sequera: A. But if any, If you have any severe violation that has to be addressed with the help of the Hr department. But that's so. Not with project management. That's something else. Okay. So
Orlando Sequera: a also working in leading the team, we can use
Orlando Sequera: rewards on recognition.
Orlando Sequera: and you might be wondering, is it the same? Isn't it the same rewards and recreation. Nope. They usually come hand in hand, but they're not the same.
Orlando Sequera: A reward is something tangible.
Orlando Sequera: It can be something monetary
Orlando Sequera: can be a gift card, or it can be even more. In some cases it this changes from organization to organization and from industry to industry. You have to make sure that you then again check your opa for your organization.
Orlando Sequera: If they have a reward and recognition plan in place, there might be some awards. A that you can they? They can help you with that. It changes but the goal of using every word to make recognition system is to motivate the team. Okay, it could include, as I said, monetary gifts.
Orlando Sequera: a additional vacation time or other, Perks or
Orlando Sequera: a trophy or a small gift, so something tangible. That's a reward that's a reward. The goal is to
Orlando Sequera: a motivate.
Orlando Sequera: I
Orlando Sequera: good
Orlando Sequera: and any never, never, never reward
Orlando Sequera: without giving the proper recognition to the individual
Orlando Sequera: and be fair when you use rewards and recreation. Okay, and
Orlando Sequera: this has to be Taylor.
Orlando Sequera: but with rewards it's always something tangible, something that
Orlando Sequera: it's. It's a gift card. It's a some monetary give something tangible, and it comes with also recognition. But recognition
Orlando Sequera: is not tangible.
Orlando Sequera: Recognition is usually free. By the way, you can provide recognition, and this is an example of recognition will be, if any of your team members, and this is something that you have to do as a project manager, any of your team members they solve a major challenge that
Orlando Sequera: is going to help not only the project, but something that can be used for other projects. A major breakthrough, a major, something big in your project happen. Make sure that the world knows
Orlando Sequera: you are the number one chair leader for your team. You have to let your stakeholders know your sponsor and all the entire organization. Why not? That's what we mean by recognition. It's something intangible.
Orlando Sequera: and it is acknowledging the behavior rather than the outcome, and
Orlando Sequera: it can be given without a reward, and
Orlando Sequera: is usually free. So this is something that we can do
Orlando Sequera: A, and we should, and we have to do it also in a timely manner. When it happens, do not wait at the end of the project. No; give recognition when it is to be given. It's a timely. It take take into account the timing it has to be done. Excuse me.
Orlando Sequera: has to be done when in, when it needs to happen right. When the the the performance or the achievement has occurred. That's one needs to be given. It has to be done in a timely matter. Do not wait.
Orlando Sequera: also
Orlando Sequera: be transparent and used proper judgment when it comes to using rewards and recognition.
Orlando Sequera: a
Orlando Sequera: pay, close attention for any negative effects resulting for misplace, competitiveness, or animosity, so we be be cognizant of that so
Orlando Sequera: careful. Use your best judgment. But this really helps in motivating the team.
Orlando Sequera: and when it comes to a super important aspect of project management.
Orlando Sequera: any project with any project, regardless of the approach.
Orlando Sequera: the decision-making aspect. It's about making decisions.
Orlando Sequera: The team charter we also created a team charter, because it's gonna help us
Orlando Sequera: with defining how we're going to make the decisions, and it's also going to establish.
Orlando Sequera: They
Orlando Sequera: escalation path for conflict resolution, super important
Orlando Sequera: the goal should be with teams to always try to achieve consensus. That means that we are all
Orlando Sequera: on the same page.
Orlando Sequera: It's a
Orlando Sequera: consensus, a group decision technique in which the team agrees to support
Orlando Sequera: the outcome.
Orlando Sequera: We are in favor of it, even if we individually
Orlando Sequera: do not agree with that decision. But we still going to support it?
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: the goal should be to achieve consensus as much as possible. Is it always going to happen? No.
Orlando Sequera: But we should try to seek consensus as much as possible
Orlando Sequera: him.
Orlando Sequera: And these are some examples in which the decision making process and empowering the team when it comes to
Orlando Sequera: prioritizing requirements. Anything related to
Orlando Sequera: the scope of the project You got to get the team involved. They're the ones doing the work regardless of the approach. They're the ones doing the the work, so get them involved
Orlando Sequera: and in agile. It's a must. It's a self-organized cell cell phone.
Orlando Sequera: manage our team.
Orlando Sequera: put even in predictive. The the paradigm is shifting, so we gotta get them more involved. Empower the team to make those decisions, or when we're trying to split requirements into tasks. The team should be involved. They're the ones doing the work that or in the estimation effort that's a most for
Orlando Sequera: agile.
Orlando Sequera: They are people that are doing the work. They are the ones doing the estimation
Orlando Sequera: in predictive.
Orlando Sequera: Their recommendation is to get them involved at least, but actually
Orlando Sequera: let them do the estimation as much as possible. They're the ones that are the most familiar with the work, and also when it comes to risks again, the people that are doing the work.
Orlando Sequera: They are your best source of knowledge. With that expertise. They have been there before. Chances are they have been there before. They have worked in similar projects, and they have
Orlando Sequera: that knowledge that we don't have as project managers. We're not doing the work that's not what we're doing. We're not. We're leaving the team. We're helping the project in other ways, but the people are doing the work can help us better when it comes to the responses.
Orlando Sequera: coming up with the best responses for those risks and also with risk classification.
Orlando Sequera: Okay. So
Orlando Sequera: the goal here is to
Orlando Sequera: as the best practice practice to involve the team in the decision making process as much as possible.
Orlando Sequera: How can we make decisions?
Orlando Sequera: We have multiple ways
Orlando Sequera: to make decisions.
Orlando Sequera: The first one is voting.
Orlando Sequera: and it's a way to factor in a lot of input before making a decision, and it gives everyone on the team an equal voice, and is preferred in many contexts
Orlando Sequera: voting right? So it's a collective decision making a approach.
Orlando Sequera: and it's used to generate, generate, classify, and prioritize pro requirements. For example, if we are a
Orlando Sequera: trying to define scope.
Orlando Sequera: We also have
Orlando Sequera: another way of
Orlando Sequera: making a decision is using what is called
Orlando Sequera: multi criteria decision making.
Orlando Sequera: This involves a use of systematic analytical approaches to find the solutions a little bit more scientific, do evaluate ideas, use analysis. And this is, for example, when what we have in the
Orlando Sequera: with risk levels, uncertainty and valuation. It's a little bit more scientific approach. We use a more analytical approach to make decisions. They're based on data right the outcome of that
Orlando Sequera: quantitative risk analysis, for example, under making decisions based on that, that's data driven multi criteria decision analysis.
Orlando Sequera: We also have
Orlando Sequera: a and
Orlando Sequera: another way of doing things. It happens sometimes
Orlando Sequera: autocratic decision making this is usually leadership driven
Orlando Sequera: based on data.
Orlando Sequera: and it's when one team member decides for the group. It happens, it happens with some key stakeholders. Sometimes
Orlando Sequera: a decision has to be made to work over time that usually comes from upper management.
Orlando Sequera: That's what we need to do in order to address these schedule over overrun that we have currently in our project. Then
Orlando Sequera: autocratic decision making is gonna happen. Some, some someone has to make that decision, and it will be made in that. That's not going to be popular, but it's. But in some cases is what needs to happen so
Orlando Sequera: autocratic decision making. But we also have
Orlando Sequera: within voting.
Orlando Sequera: We also have multiple flavors as well.
Orlando Sequera: and please pay attention closely, because I. I have noticed that most people have a little bit of trouble understanding between the
Orlando Sequera: the the difference between majority and plurality. Okay, unanimity very simple. Everyone agrees
Orlando Sequera: on a single course of action.
Orlando Sequera: unanimous decision right before
Orlando Sequera: talking about a boxing match, for example, unanimous decision, and that is very useful in teams to re great cohesion. One way of achieving that unanimity is using the delivery technique. Remember that
a
Orlando Sequera: anonymous questioner that we sent
Orlando Sequera: to multiple times in order to reach consensus. So that's one way to reach a unanimity
Orlando Sequera: majority
Orlando Sequera: East, when
Orlando Sequera: the decision is more than 50% of group support.
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: ideally you can create groups of an uneven number of participants to ensure that decisions are made, and you avoid ties
Orlando Sequera: as much or trust, then it's more than 50%. But
Okay.
Orlando Sequera: variety is
Orlando Sequera: in situations in which
Orlando Sequera: the largest block in a group decides. Even if the majority is not achieved, so it doesn't have to be more than 50. If the largest block is 20 or 10%, then
Orlando Sequera: the largest block is going to win. If we are using
Orlando Sequera: plurality as
Orlando Sequera: the
Orlando Sequera: as the decision making process for voting.
Orlando Sequera: Okay, an example of that. Not so much here in the Us. But in Europe, where you where you have multiple parties and they have. they're trying to elect the Prime Minister, for example, multiple parties, right? And alliances between those parties. Usually
Orlando Sequera: it the largest block is going to be the one that wins.
Orlando Sequera: Okay, put those largest blocks. They not necessarily gonna have more than 50. They can win an election with 2030%, etc., so that'll be an example of
Orlando Sequera: for a
Orlando Sequera: for adjunct projects and hybrid.
Orlando Sequera: You have voting methods, and this that we see here
Orlando Sequera: in the far right. I'm mostly used in agile
Orlando Sequera: this to 5 when you try to a and it's it's very simple. So
Orlando Sequera: closest you are in this agreement.
Orlando Sequera: and then, if you are neutral, will be a 3 3 fingers. That's the fifth of 5 to express a support, or it's that you're in favor, or you are against
Orlando Sequera: planning poker is another type of voting we that's used for estimation. A. When we, using the Fibonacci series and try to estimate the
Orlando Sequera: the number, the complexity of the User stories.
Orlando Sequera: Then we use the Fibonacci. We use the deck of cards with the Fibonacci series and the highest number. It's going to be more complex. They they lower numbers going to be less complex, and we read out loud the user stories.
Orlando Sequera: and then we give a chance
Orlando Sequera: to the developers to the people who are doing the work to vote, and they show their car based on what they think the level of complexity is going to be.
Orlando Sequera: There's also another dot voting to that's widely used when you're trying to determine which requirements Have the higher priority. It's putting more more dots on those requirements with your stakeholders.
Orlando Sequera: Roman voting. Very simple to understand.
Orlando Sequera: I'm in favor i'm against
Orlando Sequera: i'm neutral
Orlando Sequera: and polling
Orlando Sequera: so multiple decision making
Orlando Sequera: a method that you have when it comes to
Orlando Sequera: voting.
Orlando Sequera: We also have one aspect, and this goes back to transparency of the work that we were doing.
Orlando Sequera: This is crucial
Orlando Sequera: for any project
Orlando Sequera: we have to
Orlando Sequera: A, we have to be able.
Orlando Sequera: we have to understand, and this is part of the ethical component.
Orlando Sequera: The work that we do has to be available for anyone that needs information. We're not hiding anything. Okay, and remember that also for the exam. And even for your your daily practices. As a project manager. We have to be transparent with the way with the work we are doing.
Orlando Sequera: We should keep the work
Orlando Sequera: visible.
Orlando Sequera: A. And that means
Orlando Sequera: if we're following a predictive approach.
Orlando Sequera: We have to have our
Orlando Sequera: Wbs available and show and be able to show project progress to anyone that
Orlando Sequera: asks that question. And we also need to have
Orlando Sequera: our racy charts available to show the roles and responsibilities.
Orlando Sequera: We're not having anything we're not hiding anything. If anything, we if we start to to have challenges. It's actually the opposite. If we start to encounter challenges which we're going to encounter because no project goes
Orlando Sequera: according to plan. I heard a 100. It's like a military operation, never goes according to plan. Then
Orlando Sequera: we need to ask for help, and but we need to do it before we get before. The problem is unbearable. We're going to start seeing some signs. That's what we do with project managers. We have to ask for help. So that means building. That's why we work so hard and building the trust with those stakeholders.
Orlando Sequera: Because when problems happen, if we have been able to build
Orlando Sequera: trust. When we have to get bad news, it's going to be totally different
Orlando Sequera: if if we keep them in for.
Orlando Sequera: and they they keep a full speed of the project compared to
Orlando Sequera: having you as a project manager to tell them for 3 months that everything is going great. But all of a sudden oh, but we are we? We miss the key deliverable, or we are severely.
Orlando Sequera: we have a severe cost overrun right? So we're in the basis of avoiding some prices we have to build for us, and that goes with transparency. Keep everything we're not having anything from anybody, any. Keep your artifacts up to date.
Orlando Sequera: Keep your information available, and the same principle is applicable to agile. This is a little example of what I mean of
Orlando Sequera: an actual information radiator. In this case it's a Camden board, but it shows
Orlando Sequera: the different columns. In this case we have the To-do list what needs to be done what is in work in the last colonies. What needs
Orlando Sequera: what is what is being worked right now? And the last column that we see here is
Orlando Sequera: what is completed or done. Okay. So keep that visible available.
Orlando Sequera: and anybody has any questions feel free to to provide the information. So you're not. You're not hiding anything from anybody that is part of being transparent.
Okay.
Orlando Sequera: all right. So we have covered
Orlando Sequera: the a few topics about leading a team supporting diversity and inclusion. This is how it relates to the Exam Content outline. And then we talked about inspired, motivating and influencing the team members and stakeholders.
Orlando Sequera: We talked about the re
Orlando Sequera: recognition and reward system, and we also have to the importance of empowering your team members and stakeholders and the ways of
Orlando Sequera: a
Orlando Sequera: making of this issue.
Orlando Sequera: The next topic
Orlando Sequera: is going to be supporting members. I would like to take the time and review
Orlando Sequera: the Q. And a. For any content related questions and
Orlando Sequera: a question in the chat. How do you manage language barriers within teams?
Orlando Sequera: if i'm understanding correctly, you mean different languages. Well.
Orlando Sequera: ideally, there is one language that your
Orlando Sequera: team members can communicate. They're all speak one particular language ideally, that's the case.
Orlando Sequera: But try to be
Orlando Sequera: sensitive and try to understand it goes back to respect. Right. Try to understand
Orlando Sequera: a the cultural differences with other
Orlando Sequera: team members that in which, because maybe in your culture, is something that external might be, might not be the case in a different culture. So, first of all, ideally, there's one language that
Orlando Sequera: that you all can communicate and use. That will be ideal. I don't see I don't see it working any other way. But I think the question is more along the the the lines of respect different cultures. It's about respect, inclusion
Orlando Sequera: and using diversity as a strength. If If I understand the correctly, that is.
Orlando Sequera: okay.
Orlando Sequera: that the team go.
Orlando Sequera: There's another question in the Q. A.
Orlando Sequera: That's a team. Go through the forming stage. If someone leaves, for no new members are added.
Orlando Sequera: Not necessarily. No, it's. Usually when someone new is is change, although
Orlando Sequera: it is a change. But you still have. The people that already went through
Orlando Sequera: is really i'm gonna this is gonna sound a.
Orlando Sequera: It really depends on what that person was doing, because in my it's gonna have an impact on the workload for the rest of the team members. So
Orlando Sequera: it depends on the situation in some cases. Yes, in some cases no
Orlando Sequera: right
Orlando Sequera: Is the Mcgregor theory X and theory. Why applicable to agile approach? Absolutely. Yes.
Orlando Sequera: to personally surveys.
Orlando Sequera: Hello!
Orlando Sequera: Form the team like Meyer Bricks. Absolutely. Yes.
Orlando Sequera: yes, that can give you an idea
Orlando Sequera: absolutely. Myer Bricks is used by many organizations. Yes.
Orlando Sequera: another question on ground rules. How do you manage consequences for those who repeatedly break them, even with intervention being late to meetings not invite into work, times, etc.,
Orlando Sequera: If it's a repeated offender.
Orlando Sequera: be proactive, try to understand. Give them the benefit of it out. Let's start with that. Try to understand. Why are they doing that. But if you address it in a private setting with them and they continue to do it, then you're gonna have to escalate that, and and possible sanctions are going to be
Orlando Sequera: a are going to be needed ideally in a professional environment. People shouldn't behave like that, but it happens
Orlando Sequera: but
Orlando Sequera: right and and document
Orlando Sequera: your steps as well. Document what you do when it comes to that. So if it's not working, then you might need to
Orlando Sequera: You might need to
Orlando Sequera: actually get Hr: involved.
Orlando Sequera: there's another question.
Orlando Sequera: What would you say to the team when you have to take a decision with our their consensus?
Orlando Sequera: It's usually got.
Orlando Sequera: That's a good question.
Orlando Sequera: The answer to that.
Orlando Sequera: Those type of decisions usually are going to come from upper management
Orlando Sequera: from upper management.
Orlando Sequera: Someone in that with a high level of authority is gonna have to make that decision. Remember that your level of authority, right as a project manager so
Orlando Sequera: try to work with the team
Orlando Sequera: what I I've been in that situation before. As a project manager, my recommendation will be.
Orlando Sequera: Try to work with them, so they, even though it is an unpopular situation and popular decision. Try to work with them in.
Orlando Sequera: make sure that they understand the benefits of that decision to the project. Work on, remind them of the project vision, and
Orlando Sequera: let them know about the benefits that come with that. It might be unpopular at this time, but it's better to do it now. Work over time this weekend, rather than having to do it at the end of the project for for multiple weeks we should do it now, then, do it later, so remind them of the benefits that come with a decision as
Orlando Sequera: as the as a servant leader, I would say, that's my best advice on that situation
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: decision making and consensus or 2 ends of the spectrum, and they not necessarily consensus is one way to make a decision, the ideal one. But it's not always possible, though
Orlando Sequera: it's not always going to be possible. It is ideally, and recommended another question in a situation where a Pm. Has a small group. By that I mean a small team, I think.
Orlando Sequera: one of which is a top performer and talented. How do you temper with great creativity comes
Orlando Sequera: great.
Orlando Sequera: Come.
Orlando Sequera: with great creativity comes great
Orlando Sequera: responsibility. I think, as this in video believes that all all the the bills are in fear. Oh, okay, I see where this question is going.
Orlando Sequera: Nope. Remind them of
Orlando Sequera: they
Orlando Sequera: The fact that it is is all about the team.
Orlando Sequera: There is no I in team.
Orlando Sequera: It's about the team. It's not about the individual, and for make sure that you do that not only with that person you do that with everyone.
Orlando Sequera: They, the stakeholders, are looking at the team. They're not looking at the individual, so
Orlando Sequera: remind them of that. It's about individual commitment. It's not about individual commitment. It's about a team commitment, and we have to work it's it's a team. There's no I in team. Okay, so you have to work on making sure that not only that individual.
Orlando Sequera: that also everyone understands, that is, everything is about the team, not about the individual. A. And because
Orlando Sequera: I. If if that was the case that people will be working by himself or herself right there's a reason why he needs to he or she. They need to work with other people, so re reinforce the message of
Orlando Sequera: the team teamwork.
Orlando Sequera: hey? Will any of these team techniques
Orlando Sequera: differ when working a unit? Environment. No, they should have nothing to do with Union considerations.
Orlando Sequera: No team performance is Nope.
Orlando Sequera: A going along with
Orlando Sequera: the leadership managing teams. How difficult it is
Orlando Sequera: to lead a project in a field. You aren't familiar with it's more challenging.
Orlando Sequera: It's more challenging. There are definitely in school. There are different schools of thought when it comes to that. Some organizations believe that someone that has experience in the field makes a better project manager. Some other organizations Not necessarily. And I've seen it both ways. I've seen great project managers
Orlando Sequera: that came from marketing, and they started working in it.
Orlando Sequera: and they do great.
Orlando Sequera: and I've seen the opposite, too, so they're not necessarily mutually exclusive. A project management as a science is working with people.
Orlando Sequera: and if you can work well with people and lead a team and be successful and keep everything coordinated and organize. You're going to be successfully in any industry, and the beauty of this techniques that we're using here. Learning is that this is applicable to any industry. This is not industry specific. This is industry neutral.
Orlando Sequera: okay.
Orlando Sequera: Which approach to managing a project will be the most effective
Orlando Sequera: outsource internally manage. It depends on this. Well, you're given the answer at the end. It really depends on your situation. You gotta take a look into account your specific context within your organization.
Orlando Sequera: All right.
Orlando Sequera: is data the only key driver in decision making methods. No, not necessarily. But it's an important one, but it's not the only one.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: Have you seen auto product styling, voting absolutely many times, as I mentioned before, when the as a session is made that we have to work over time on the weekend. Yes, multiple times. It happens all the time.
Orlando Sequera: all right. Myers Breaks can assist when determining type of skills
Orlando Sequera: one has and can increase a motion in 10 years with leadership. This can be helpful in building teams to stormy, normally forming, as discussed in our class earlier, but it's not on the Pmp. Test. It's not mentioned, but absolutely so. That's a true statement. Yes.
Orlando Sequera: okay. So I think we have
Orlando Sequera: address. the questions.
Orlando Sequera: Let's go in and continue
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to support the team member performance.
Orlando Sequera: Managing and lead right.
Orlando Sequera: Teams are
Orlando Sequera: in most cases more productive and driven when they know exactly where they're going. When they have clear objectives to meet
Orlando Sequera: project managers
Orlando Sequera: project Managers can support the team by setting these objectives collaboratively with the team.
Orlando Sequera: One approach
Orlando Sequera: that we use for that is something that is called Mbo, or management by objectives
Orlando Sequera: to help with that
Orlando Sequera: the objective setting can be conducted at the start of the project or face.
Orlando Sequera: but it's normally done throughout the project. Life cycle
Orlando Sequera: A.
Orlando Sequera: Even regardless of the approach in agile or predictive.
Orlando Sequera: and that helps to set the targets and commitments for the upcoming time period. Okay, so
Orlando Sequera: clear objectives
Orlando Sequera: that helps the team set set those objectives with the team
Orlando Sequera: create objectives that are challenging, but realistically possible.
Orlando Sequera: And this can be done
Orlando Sequera: if we're following a predictive approach, it's going to be the to start the project or face.
Orlando Sequera: or throughout the project life cycle. If we're following an adaptive approach or agile, okay. And as servant leaders.
Orlando Sequera: we have to help in defining the vision, making sure that people are aligned to that vision, and then
Orlando Sequera: super important, we motivate people to pursue the vision.
Orlando Sequera: So that's one way that we can help teams with product activities
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to
Orlando Sequera: measuring the team member performance. Remember, this is not. In in most cases
Orlando Sequera: our team members are not going to be our direct report. So we're talking about project performance, right? So we're assessing this. This is not their Yearly review evaluation. We're assessing the team member performance. That's what we're doing here. And
Orlando Sequera: in regards to the project task and we can what or the project work
Orlando Sequera: we can use in for formal, informal assessments, and and not with a punitive approach or connotation. Right? What we're trying to understand here is.
Orlando Sequera: how can we help them? As as a server leaders that we are. How can we help them to improve? That's what we're doing. The second bullet point that you see here discover a produce for improvement. That's why we're doing this. We're not trying to evaluate a poor performance and come up with a separate sessions. No, that that's a different arena. That's the functional manager that is doing that. We are trying to
Orlando Sequera: assess their performance
Orlando Sequera: to find ways to help them to improve. That's that's it. To help them to to improve
Orlando Sequera: a
Orlando Sequera: agile teams.
Orlando Sequera: They are self-organized, and we need to make sure that they have a safe environment that can help them with their performance and make sure that's our main goal. To make sure they feel a safe, and they have that safe environment for them to express
Orlando Sequera: to regulate their own performance by by feeling safe and reinforce. That message that I just mentioned
Orlando Sequera: is about the team reinforced a message. If they focus on the commitment. It's about. It's a team commitment. It's not an individual commitment. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: And when it comes to
Orlando Sequera: performance assessment tasks, we should compare the performance to the goals that we set.
Orlando Sequera: We should also.
Orlando Sequera: even though we created
Orlando Sequera: they
Orlando Sequera: actual racing matrix, we should re-clarify
Orlando Sequera: they grow some responsibilities. That's why we create those artifacts to use them when needed.
Orlando Sequera: And this is one example
Orlando Sequera: we might need to require for rural responsibilities, and that's usually one of the common causes
Orlando Sequera: or conflict.
Orlando Sequera: We should be able to provide positive
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: as well as negative feedback voting a constructive way.
Orlando Sequera: we should try to discover unknown and not resolve issues, and
Orlando Sequera: in some cases create. They might need some training and create some individual training plans and try to set future growth. So
Orlando Sequera: we're talking about the performance in regards to the project. Work.
Orlando Sequera: hey?
Orlando Sequera: Also
Orlando Sequera: some of you were mentioning, and this is where
Orlando Sequera: some of it came up the personality indicators, and I know that some of you were mentioning Myers Bricks. That really helps to understand
Orlando Sequera: the type of person that different type of personalities, so
Orlando Sequera: many organizations. They use personality test that, like Myers breaks abuse. I've done it multiple times.
Orlando Sequera: and they help
Orlando Sequera: to understand the different personalities that you're working with, and that can be a good behavioral predictor, for
Orlando Sequera: there's a big caveat, right? It's not always a 100% the case. So keep that a keep that caveat in mind. That is not always 100% an absolute
Orlando Sequera: Okay?
Orlando Sequera: And
Orlando Sequera: if you're using this and other aspect is right to a sick permission from the team members and explain why you're using it because they may. Why is the Pm. Wanting to get at this evaluation or or a Myers breaks type of indicator. So
Orlando Sequera: So okay, let them know. Remember, we're transparent. It's it's all about the team. We have nothing to we have nothing to hide, so they can be helpful
Orlando Sequera: because they can encourage a team to achieve an aspire as professionals. It can help with building interactions, build trust and empower team members by aligning their strengths
Orlando Sequera: with knowledge, sharing, and coaching role.
Orlando Sequera: But we have some do. Some don's with those personal indicators
Orlando Sequera: use the exercise as a way
Orlando Sequera: for a team building activity. So some of you were asking about example of a team builder activity. This could be an example, you said as a predictor, as I mentioned, not as an absolute right so big caveat in there, and always ask for permission. But
Orlando Sequera: they don't they some of the don't is don't make fix assumptions based on the Myers bricks. Result: it's not 100% bulletproof and do not share any personal information by no means with anyone without having permission.
Orlando Sequera: Okay, so useful, but use at your own discretion as well.
Orlando Sequera: and we are ready for
Orlando Sequera: we're break. So we're gonna take a break and we're going to.
Orlando Sequera: We're going to be back in 10 min. Enjoy your break
Orlando Sequera: will be right back.
Orlando Sequera: going to continue with the content. And remember this
Orlando Sequera: personally. Indicators like Myers bricks. They're great, but they are we. We gotta keep a few things in mind when we use them.
Orlando Sequera: and also
Orlando Sequera: the whole goal of
Orlando Sequera: Besides this personality test like Myers bricks.
Orlando Sequera: So we're using what is called psychometrics.
Orlando Sequera: They're great. You can adjust them within the team to the emotional.
Orlando Sequera: A and other needs of the team members and key break stakeholders.
Orlando Sequera: Because you may wonder. Why do we want to use those personal indicators? Because they can personally is gonna have an impact on the role that you have within the team. How do you interact with other people, and whether your core values
Orlando Sequera: align with the teams core values that go to it's a good indicator. But
Orlando Sequera: Remember some of the psychological team Rolls are results oriented. Some people are results oriented. They some other people are more relationship focused.
Orlando Sequera: Some are more disruptive thinkers. Some people are more pragmatic. Some people are more process oriented or rule followers than other people, so that can help you to understand that a a little bit more with your team. So it's a good recommendation to use this
Orlando Sequera: the tools with your team.
Orlando Sequera: and that takes us to
Orlando Sequera: a very important aspect
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to team performance and working with any team. This is very important for the Pmp. Exam, as I mentioned before, about a
Orlando Sequera: several leadership. This is another aspect that you have to take into account for your Pmp. Exam. You should expect questions related to emotional intelligence
Orlando Sequera: as we have learned, it's not just enough to have
Orlando Sequera: IQ.
Orlando Sequera: That is technical knowledge. We also need Eq. Emotional intelligence. So you might be wondering why
Orlando Sequera: i'm very smart. I should be able to work with any team
Orlando Sequera: because you're not working as an individual. You're working with other people, so you need to be emotionally intelligent to be able to work with other people, and that goes not just for you as the project manager, but also for the team members. Okay, this is critical, but it is important that you asked the Pm.
Orlando Sequera: You are able to have a high level of Eq emotional intelligence. This is going to help you to
Orlando Sequera: understand. The beauty of emotional intelligence is that it's going to help you to understand your own emotions.
Orlando Sequera: and also the emotions of
Orlando Sequera: a They
Orlando Sequera: people that are around you
Orlando Sequera: to in order to help to minimize conflict as much as possible, and it boils down to
Orlando Sequera: not letting your emotions, dictate your actions or take over, Gotta keep those emotions in check.
Orlando Sequera: And
Orlando Sequera: these.
Orlando Sequera: just for some background. This is this is part of those
Orlando Sequera: They They work in the emotional intelligence, started back in the nineties, and right now it's recognized as a key.
Orlando Sequera: personal and in a personal scale for project management.
Orlando Sequera: When it comes to emotional intelligence, we have 5 components that we see here the first one being emotional self-awareness and that may that actually is referred to. How well
Orlando Sequera: you know your own emotions
Orlando Sequera: in a variety of situations.
Orlando Sequera: The next act, the next aspect is self-regulation.
Orlando Sequera: How well can you control those emotions.
Orlando Sequera: The next one is motivation.
Orlando Sequera: and that is referred to your reasons for achievement.
Orlando Sequera: The next aspect is empathy is, how well can you read the motions of other people, and the last one, super, important as well is social skills. How well can you build relationships, relationships, and report with other people?
Orlando Sequera: So 5 elements that together form emotional intelligence.
Orlando Sequera: And
Orlando Sequera: what can we do
Orlando Sequera: to build that emotional intelligence? What can we do to build it? Easier set than done by the way. This takes time
Orlando Sequera: takes time, and you can apply this in any setting. But it is important that we keep those emotions and check. We're going to have
Orlando Sequera: situations, and we we all have blind spots.
Orlando Sequera: We all have biases.
Orlando Sequera: It's it's part of human nature. But we need to keep those emotions under control. So we start in order to build our emotional intelligence following this cycle. It's a good way. You start with social a with self-awareness.
Orlando Sequera: It's about a self-regulating yourself.
Orlando Sequera: So understanding those blind spots that you might have understanding those
Orlando Sequera: situations that can trigger your emotions
Orlando Sequera: and also
Orlando Sequera: building the self-confidence.
Orlando Sequera: and also working on self management.
Orlando Sequera: That is self-control transparency. They have an initiative and
Orlando Sequera: a drive to achieve. So you start with yourself right to build that, and then you move to the social Aspect a about social awareness having empathy paying attention, reading how your emotions
Orlando Sequera: a it impact other people around you pay attention to to those non-verbal queues, body language.
Orlando Sequera: A. It's also about organizational awareness and service, orientation, and
Orlando Sequera: also building those relationships, relationship management.
Orlando Sequera: a developing other people influencing other people that this is where serving leadership is come, is gonna come handy helping to develop others. We're in the business of developing other people.
Orlando Sequera: being a a catalyst for change.
Orlando Sequera: addressing and managing conflict.
Orlando Sequera: building bonds with team members and stakeholders and fostering an environment about teamwork and collaboration. That's
Orlando Sequera: those are ways that you can that you can fall in order to build your emotional intelligence. Started with yourself and then with others.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: empathy
Orlando Sequera: is it's important. Empathy is a critical aspect of emotional intelligence that have that has a huge
Orlando Sequera: a huge impact in your ability to relate
Orlando Sequera: to others and to be able to work with other people because it's going to help you to understand their motivations.
Orlando Sequera: A having empathy is going to help you
Orlando Sequera: 2
Orlando Sequera: A.
Orlando Sequera: But to help ourselves in work.
Orlando Sequera: It's going to help individuals, and it's also going to help it to help others. It's going to help your team out. Work. It's going to help the team. So it's going to help you to understand others, and it's going to help you with your goal of being
Orlando Sequera: a a server leader. But it's also going to help the team. It's going to help you to develop other people leverage diversity and have a political awareness.
Orlando Sequera: So Empathy.
Orlando Sequera: as we said before, is one of the components of the emotional intelligence. Okay, is the ability to understand others viewpoints
Orlando Sequera: and be a team player.
Orlando Sequera: So pay attention to that to those non verbal cues. That's a really a good way to build that emotional intelligence. This, by the way, this topic of emotional intelligence is
Orlando Sequera: critical for the Pmp. Exam. Make sure that you understand it really well, should respect a few questions related to emotional intelligence. Make sure that you review it if you need additional content. This is also cover in your agile practice. Guide.
Orlando Sequera: Make sure that you review it, and for those of you that need to brush off your agile skill set, or that you're new to agile. My recommendation is read the Agile Practice Guide.
Orlando Sequera: This is going to be your best bet for
Orlando Sequera: for the Xm: okay.
Okay.
Orlando Sequera: all right.
Orlando Sequera: Social skills.
Orlando Sequera: high performing teams. If we have said before, they are good at communicating, they're good at building bonds.
Orlando Sequera: It's all about collaboration.
Orlando Sequera: They understand, change and they embraced.
Orlando Sequera: They're not afraid of changes.
Orlando Sequera: They're able to manage conflicts. That's another topic. We're going to talk about conflict management. Indeed.
Orlando Sequera: a a little bit later.
Orlando Sequera: huge topic for the exam as well, and they're good at influencing, and they
Orlando Sequera: leadership.
Orlando Sequera: But one asked.
Orlando Sequera: And when it comes to working with teams is
Orlando Sequera: motivation.
Orlando Sequera: So motivation rolls down to lead people towards having the desire
Orlando Sequera: a skill set, and for that you need to motivate them. Remember that in most cases, as the project managers, we are not going to
Orlando Sequera: half the level of a 30. We have to use leadership, so we use inspiration with motivation to lead the team
Orlando Sequera: as servant leaders.
Orlando Sequera: so there are some elements that are associated with motivation. The first one is
Orlando Sequera: achievement or drive.
Orlando Sequera: This is, this is about setting tough goals and taking chances.
Orlando Sequera: driving hard to get results
Orlando Sequera: and and satisfy or exceed
Orlando Sequera: aspirations and ideas, and discover how to operate capabilities, and always try to minimize uncertainty and discover ways to improve.
Orlando Sequera: Second element is
Orlando Sequera: commitment.
Orlando Sequera: Relying on your team's core principles that are in the team charter to make decisions
Orlando Sequera: also
Orlando Sequera: realizing a benefit in a comprehensive quest.
Orlando Sequera: holistic participation. Everybody involved
Orlando Sequera: a
Orlando Sequera: gladly sacrificed to fulfill a substantial company goal
Orlando Sequera: and look for opportunities to achieve teams. The team mission.
Orlando Sequera: The next element is initiative
Orlando Sequera: is going above and beyond to what's essential or anticipated
Orlando Sequera: is inspiring others through externally resource resourceful feat.
Orlando Sequera: and being prepared to grab or seize opportunities.
Orlando Sequera: And the last one is optimism
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: hope to succeed, not do not fear, failure, hope to succeed, hope to succeed, and that is
Orlando Sequera: probably the most important aspect, at least in my personal opinion of motivation. You we plan to succeed. We hope to so, although
Orlando Sequera: I always remember this.
Orlando Sequera: this NASA director that one time said, Well hope it's not a plan, but we have to be optimistic. We are not fearing failure.
Orlando Sequera: whatever it takes. That's why we're we're starting so hard to
Orlando Sequera: to become a
Orlando Sequera: Mp. Certified. That's why we're taking the time, and we we're gonna pull the all the blocks from tiers to make sure that we master this, this content to get ready for the Pmp. Exam. So hope to succeed. Do not hope to a to fail is Don't fear, failure, plan and work, and hope to succeed
Orlando Sequera: a perceived reversal
Orlando Sequera: as something that is under your control, that you can address is reversals as caused by something that you can control a controllable factor rather than a personal defect.
Orlando Sequera: and steadily working towards calls, regardless of barriers and glitches. Okay, we're towards your goals. That's why we told you at the at the beginning of the class
Orlando Sequera: to get ready for the Pmp. Exam. It's. It's hard work. It's not easy. This is a lot of content, as you can see, using this as an example. But I want to motivate you. It is achievable. It requires a lot of hard work, but you have what you need. This is the content that you need to to make sure that you, master.
Orlando Sequera: take practice questions. You're going to need an average 100 h on top of this class. It's not going to be overnight. You can slice and Dx to our spot.
Orlando Sequera: Plan to succeed, hope to succeed. Do not plan for failure. Otherwise you are
Orlando Sequera: The results are not going to be positive. Okay, it is doable. It is a little hard work, but it is doable. So those are the motivation elements.
Orlando Sequera: And
Orlando Sequera: for those of you that come from the military, you know Exactly.
Orlando Sequera: This is not the first time that you have heard
Orlando Sequera: a these concepts. I'm. Sure i'm a 100% sure.
Orlando Sequera: All right. So what have we covered? So far?
Orlando Sequera: It.
Orlando Sequera: We have talked about supporting team performance
Orlando Sequera: price, team, member performance Again, Api's support and recognized team member, growth and development.
Orlando Sequera: develop the right feedback, approach and verify performance improvement.
Orlando Sequera: Remember that it. The assessing team performance is not about disciplinary sanctions. They're not a direct report. It's not the yearly evaluation. We are looking at their performance, and we're trying to help our team members to do better. That's what we are trying to do.
Orlando Sequera: and then we have to promote this team performance through the application of emotional intelligence super important for the Pmp. Exam.
Orlando Sequera: Please make sure that you understand emotional intelligence. Really? Well, you should expect questions that are related to emotional intelligence in your Pmp. Exam.
Orlando Sequera: And by related to emotional intelligence. They are not going to ask you
Orlando Sequera: about the definition. They're going to ask you about the application. How can you use the emotional intelligence to
Orlando Sequera: it? Solve this scenario questions, and if you want to get more information, what type of questions can you get
Orlando Sequera: related to emotional intelligence or conflict management, or any topic? Take practice questions in test Prep. You have the resource, the best resource that can help you with that. Take practice questions in test Prep.
Orlando Sequera: Okay. So before we continue the next topic that we're going to cover is
Orlando Sequera: communicate and collaborate with stakeholders. But before that I would like to take a look at the Q. A. And answer
Orlando Sequera: any questions that are content related. Remember to vote on the questions that you would like
Orlando Sequera: me to
Orlando Sequera: answer.
Orlando Sequera: first.
Orlando Sequera: what this politics? There's a question in chat. What does politics have to do with empathy?
Orlando Sequera: It it's more about the
Orlando Sequera: organizational culture. You need to understand.
Orlando Sequera: They
Orlando Sequera: one part of the organization, of course, is gonna be the politics, and that's
Orlando Sequera: is tied up to
Orlando Sequera: the motivational aspect because it could be something that is affecting your team members. They can.
Orlando Sequera: Politics, office politics can have any. It's it's a
Orlando Sequera: an enterprise, environmental factor that can that can have an impact on your team members performance. So that's why it's mentioned in that context. Okay? And the question was, what does politics have to do with empathy and
Orlando Sequera: being paying attention and and caring over other people's emotions and and feelings. So that's what empathy,
Orlando Sequera: In this context is referring to.
Orlando Sequera: another question.
Orlando Sequera: Will the exam be asking for death for deep knowledge
Orlando Sequera: of the measuring tools other than the names. The exam is a critical thinking. Again, They're not going to ask you about specific tools. The scenario questions are going to be
Orlando Sequera: a very specific about a situation in a project. And then how can you fix that problem? How can you fix that situation again? My my recommendation is, Go to test, Prep and take practice questions.
Orlando Sequera: and you'll have a better idea.
Orlando Sequera: Another question is, how should how should we prepare for the Pmp. It's a reading on Agile and PIN book after this book came, and then taking practice test. No, we said that on day one
Orlando Sequera: you can take
Orlando Sequera: your
Orlando Sequera: this class. Take your boot, can watch the replace. We're going over the entire content.
Orlando Sequera: You can go to Percipio and watch.
Orlando Sequera: They specific videos on topics recorded videos already.
Orlando Sequera: Barb does a great job in breaking down these concepts, and you have access to those videos as well to reinforce the knowledge
Orlando Sequera: and take practice questions.
Orlando Sequera: and in average is going to take you to get ready for the exam anywhere from 80 to 100 h on top of this class, so
Orlando Sequera: that in that that involves taking practice, questions, reviewing the materials, performance, or analysis.
Orlando Sequera: To understand what are your strengths around your weaknesses?
Orlando Sequera: What are some of the opportunities and threats. So try to try to do that and then and use the exam. Content Outline for that.
Orlando Sequera: So that'll be my recommendation. Okay. But you have everything you need in order to be
Orlando Sequera: successful.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: all right.
Orlando Sequera: There is another. I think it's a comment in the in the Q. A. Hiring a trainer for this team building and emotional intelligence needs is important. Many times people need other games or tools.
Orlando Sequera: sorry
Orlando Sequera: other games. The tools to help them grow
Orlando Sequera: in this not always possible as a Pm. To help others increase emotional intelligence, real work thoughts for me to this class. That's true. As for Pmp. Exam. This slide is very important to know. So to test questions on how to address the situation
Orlando Sequera: and collaboration, Thank you. Yes, that is
Orlando Sequera: a 100% correct.
Orlando Sequera: but for the exam you have to, and it's remember that they're promoting best practices. Right? So
Orlando Sequera: a real real life might be a little bit different. But yes, for the exam. You have to do your best to incorporate in emotional intelligence.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: all right.
Orlando Sequera: I think
Orlando Sequera: I think we are cut up with the questions.
Orlando Sequera: Yeah.
Orlando Sequera: thank you for for that advice.
Orlando Sequera: Yes, I think we are cut up with the questions. All right. Now. We're gonna continue.
Orlando Sequera: A the next topic is going to be communication and collaboration with stakeholders. We mentioned that before is coming up again this is really important, or the exam as well. This is how we keep our stakeholders engage.
Orlando Sequera: Communication is
Orlando Sequera: the real work of leadership. And this is something that the Dean of the hardware business school said in
Orlando Sequera: Santa what I
Orlando Sequera: so a while back.
Orlando Sequera: A communications are both personal, and they are also strategic
Orlando Sequera: as a project manager.
Orlando Sequera: and this is according to some experts.
Orlando Sequera: You are going to spend
Orlando Sequera: 90% or more of your time communicating in
Orlando Sequera: one form or another.
Orlando Sequera: You have to be able to manage, and I see some of the questions I will say the
Orlando Sequera: some of you that are mute to break management. You see that there's a lot of artifacts that we have to manage. There's a lot of moving parts that come on these multiple plans, this many
Orlando Sequera: artifacts that we have to keep up. Yes, you have to be able to manage volumes of
Orlando Sequera: formal and informal
Orlando Sequera: documents, conversations, emails. That is your job
Orlando Sequera: making sure that
Orlando Sequera: everything is happen. Everything needs to happen is happened. The coordinations that need to occur are happening
Orlando Sequera: because the people who are doing the work are the team members. Okay, you are helping the team in a different capacity, keeping everything organized, everything coordinated, making sure that they have everything they need to do their work, providing status to a stakeholders and opera management.
Orlando Sequera: addressing, making sure that you have plans in place to address risks.
Orlando Sequera: address any challenges that are related to the budget. I've raised any challenges that are related to the schedule. You are keeping the share.
Orlando Sequera: but the ones that are doing
Orlando Sequera: are your
Orlando Sequera: project team members. They're the subject matter experts. Okay. So you, in order to be successful. You have to have healthy, collaborative working relationship with the team.
Orlando Sequera: and not only
Orlando Sequera: with the team members, but also with your stakeholders, and we do that. We build that through
Orlando Sequera: communication. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: A: so it's also very important that we know that we make sure
Orlando Sequera: that the right information is getting to the right stakeholder so they can make the best decisions
Orlando Sequera: we in.
Orlando Sequera: As I said before, it's not always going to be.
Orlando Sequera: It's not always gonna be a blue skies, green pastures, right? That everything is great, and we're having always like, come by a moment. Nope, that's not the case. We're gonna face some storms. We're gonna face some challenges.
Orlando Sequera: And but when we have to deliver the bad news, if we have kept
Orlando Sequera: our
Orlando Sequera: stakeholders inform
Orlando Sequera: the challenges that we might be having what we're doing to address those challenges.
Orlando Sequera: and we have been able to build trust with them from day one
Orlando Sequera: when the moment of giving them bad news comes.
Orlando Sequera: Probably
Orlando Sequera: they're They're not gonna even be surprised. Chances are they're not gonna be even be surprised because they're right there with you. They're gonna be able to
Orlando Sequera: witness firsthand the challenges that might be coming down the horizon.
Orlando Sequera: And they're going to understand.
Orlando Sequera: We are as project managers in the business of avoiding at all costs any surprises. Okay, and that goes back to what we were mentioning before being transparent.
Orlando Sequera: We we can be
Orlando Sequera: pain in a picture that is not real.
Orlando Sequera: We have to, we are
Orlando Sequera: we, we we have to abide by by the by, Pmi's code of ethics. We have to be transparent. That is really important. So
Orlando Sequera: a don't be afraid of giving bad news.
Orlando Sequera: The promise come when you in your status reports, for example, have intended everyone. Everything is great. Risks are under control.
Orlando Sequera: Our a no challenges with the schedule, no challenges with the budget. But then
Orlando Sequera: you know that it that that is not the case, and you can hide it anymore. And
Orlando Sequera: 4 weeks from now
Orlando Sequera: everything, the the the the flock gates are open, and we have major delays. May your cost over us for what happened in the previous tennis reports. That's when your stakeholders are going to to start questioning the way you're managing the project. So
Orlando Sequera: build that trust for communication.
Orlando Sequera: be Provide the information in Don't. Be afraid to give mad news, it happens, but if you build it frost, they're going to be there. They're going to understand, and the response is going to be different compared to
Orlando Sequera: and giving them okay and catching your your, your stakeholders off guard with a surprise. Right? So that is crucial. That is crucial
Orlando Sequera: also.
Orlando Sequera: Another important aspect that is related to communication is, as we have said before.
Orlando Sequera: we have to keep
Orlando Sequera: the polls speed about
Orlando Sequera: the engagement of those stakeholders, regardless of the approach. Whether we're going with a predictive approach or agile approach, we have to keep our stakeholders engage.
Orlando Sequera: That is extremely important. This is an ongoing task.
Orlando Sequera: Remember that we talked about this at the beginning of the project, but this is something that we have to do periodically throughout the project. That is not a set formula that says, oh, you have to do this every 2 weeks. No, every project is different. But this is something that you have to do throughout your project
Orlando Sequera: in order to be successful. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: So
Orlando Sequera: use their grit.
Orlando Sequera: Make sure that you're addressing them.
Orlando Sequera: Place your stakeholders in the grid which ones are the ones that are hyp. For example, right. This is one example: hype we're looking at 2 dimensions here. Power and interest they once are, manage closely. Make sure that they've been managed closely.
Orlando Sequera: Stakeholders, that is, and
Orlando Sequera: excuse me, the ones that need to be kept in form, that they are kept in forb. So make sure that you are following this a. Throughout the life cycle of your project.
Orlando Sequera: and one plan that is going to help you to make sure this happens.
Orlando Sequera: It's going to be
Orlando Sequera: the Communications management plan.
Orlando Sequera: because this is going to help you to understand a
Orlando Sequera: which which one of your stakeholders are the senders
Orlando Sequera: which one of the stakeholders of the receivers which which party individual part is going to be the past their 30.
Orlando Sequera: It to get confident that's gonna be part of your Communications management plan. What is the type of information that you're going to be sharing. What is the rationale
Orlando Sequera: to provide that information or communication? What language for men and
Orlando Sequera: and level of detail is going to be used. How frequently the information has to be delivered.
Orlando Sequera: and whether in some cases you need acknowledgment or a response.
Orlando Sequera: What are the processes for escalation?
Orlando Sequera: We keep measuring escalation. That's
Orlando Sequera: It's going to be spelled out here
Orlando Sequera: updating, refining the plan
Orlando Sequera: how to run your project Status meetings. That's a key aspect of communication. If you're following a predictive approach, you are going to provide status reports to your
Orlando Sequera: for stakeholders, and they that's gonna be the the format of those reports. Gonna be defined here. How often do you have to to have those titles, reports.
Orlando Sequera: meetings.
Orlando Sequera: And also when it comes to product information? What are the communication methods and technologies that we're going to be using a. What are, what are the allocated resources that we have for communication.
Orlando Sequera: grocery for terminology, any flow charts that are needed workflows, list of reports, meeting plans, and any constraints that are applicable.
Orlando Sequera: All right. So a lot of information. So we know when it comes to communications we have to.
Orlando Sequera: How often do I have to send the status report? The answer is in the plan. The communications management plan.
Orlando Sequera: So when it comes to
Orlando Sequera: managing product communications.
Orlando Sequera: They
Orlando Sequera: This matrix is a shorter bridge, is a shorter version of the communication management tool. This can be a spreadsheet.
Orlando Sequera: It it can even be in a white port
Orlando Sequera: something, and you can tailor this to your, to your a team.
Orlando Sequera: This communications matrix.
Orlando Sequera: So it it covers the identified team members and stakeholders, as which one of the senders we want to which one of the receivers which ones the authorized authorized in person. So this is a condensed version of the Communications management plan, and then you'll also cover the
Orlando Sequera: communication requirements. The type of information, the reason for communication, language, format, content level of detail, the frequency, and whether we need
Orlando Sequera: a acknowledgment or a response is required. And what are the templates for escalation.
Orlando Sequera: and also the communication methods of technology. So you can use either
Orlando Sequera: the full-blown
Orlando Sequera: communications management plan, or at the very least, you can use a condensed version, which is what we call the communications matrix. But you have to
Orlando Sequera: a keep that into
Orlando Sequera: into account. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to
Orlando Sequera: communication.
Orlando Sequera: education is a 2 waste, free
Orlando Sequera: and important aspects, and we talked about
Orlando Sequera: the communication, the the basic communication model.
Orlando Sequera: But
Orlando Sequera: we're going to leave it deeper here.
Orlando Sequera: A active listening and performing feedback are critical communication techniques.
Orlando Sequera: They are critical. It's about active listening. It's about effective feedback, we, when we use active listening, the listener must focus on attention Most focused. He or her attention
Orlando Sequera: on the message to the end, rather than trying to formulate the response in a premature way. In it being, we have to pay attention until the end.
Orlando Sequera: Not
Orlando Sequera: try to
Orlando Sequera: Come up with an answer while we are receiving the message. Okay. So
Orlando Sequera: when we're following active listening, this is going to help us with collaboration?
Orlando Sequera: We can ask
Orlando Sequera: they. It requires a listener to provide feedback about what they heard. It's about restating. You can
Orlando Sequera: gonna repeat the gist of the message to confirm proper understanding
Orlando Sequera: we can use. You can restate it, you can paraphrase, and you can use some body language like not in the head for acknowledgment that you are understanding. And if you're using active listening means that you're
Orlando Sequera: your confirm and understanding, and you are working on building trust.
Orlando Sequera: Effective feedback is.
Orlando Sequera: should be of offer in a timely manner. It's subjective and critical, and it's positive it's receive as understood, an objective is negative.
Orlando Sequera: If misunderstood, or there, or if there is a lack of trust or psychological safety. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: A.
Orlando Sequera: As we have, we have heard, probably multiple times. No news is good news. A lack of feedback is an implicit, implicit acceptance of the message by the receiver. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: try to provide feedback. Please do not ignore people. Reply to those emails we we have to, we we have to
Orlando Sequera: keep that in mind. Okay, I know that there's a high volume of communication, but the only people people have a hanging, a communication failures.
Orlando Sequera: This is important communication. Failures are threats to projects. And what? What is a threat?
Orlando Sequera: I'm gonna unpo the chat for a minute.
Orlando Sequera: What is a threat to our project? And the chat is
Orlando Sequera: I'm. Past. What is the threat?
Orlando Sequera: It is a risk for what type of risk.
Orlando Sequera: It is a negative risk. Correct? I'm: going to post the chat.
Orlando Sequera: Okay. So
Orlando Sequera: this is another aspect that you have another category in your risk
Orlando Sequera: classification.
Orlando Sequera: Make sure that you discuss any communications.
Orlando Sequera: a risks or issues openly with the team.
Orlando Sequera: with team members directly.
Orlando Sequera: If you're following an agile approach during the retrospective.
Orlando Sequera: In the case of key stakeholders you met you might need to escalate, For example, you're trying to get information. You have done everything possible within your reach to get a hold of a key stakeholder that is not providing you with information that is needed by the team.
Orlando Sequera: And you have done everything you send multiple emails. You
Orlando Sequera: You have face to face meetings with the individual, but it still weren't able to get the information that was needed. They're not repunt responding. You're leaving voicemail, they don't respond. You're doing everything that you can within
Orlando Sequera: your breach, and it's not working. If you have exhausted all the options available. Then you go to the nuclear option, which is escalation, and usually your best PET is going to be to work with your sponsor. Usually the sponsor has
Orlando Sequera: Is someone in upper management that can help you in that situation, right? But you have to do your due diligence. You have to try to solve it as much as possible within the constraint of the team. But if that is not enough, then you can escalate and get the help from from someone else
Orlando Sequera: Okay, as needed, but always think of escalation as the last resort.
Orlando Sequera: When it comes to communications.
Orlando Sequera: A
Orlando Sequera: some projects are gonna require more for more communication methods like reports.
Orlando Sequera: and in many cases these reports are going to need sign offs.
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: you have to understand clearly.
Orlando Sequera: and that's part of the communications management plan the frequency of these reports. When do they need to get them in order to provide them in a timely manner? Okay. So this: the recipients of reports are going to be in the stakeholder engagement plan, and in the Communications management plan can.
Orlando Sequera: And i'm gonna i'm gonna impose a chat. Can anyone give an example of a report that you use in your organization feel free to use the chat.
Orlando Sequera: Can you think of any reports
Orlando Sequera: weekly.
Orlando Sequera: or it's daily status reports.
Orlando Sequera: deployment report, monthly status report Exactly.
Orlando Sequera: Kpi's monitoring visit report, status report exactly
Orlando Sequera: Exactly.
Orlando Sequera: Quality report. Yes, release, report
Orlando Sequera: correct.
Orlando Sequera: Correct.
Orlando Sequera: I'm going to post the chat.
Orlando Sequera: So thank you. Correct. So
Orlando Sequera: those reports, some of them are going to be applicable. Some of them might not be a pickable depends on the industry. It depends on the organization, but that's correct. And
Orlando Sequera: so they might need to be more formal than others. But some of the ones that some of you mentioned here. The status reports, those are key, and usually we have to define in there the actual, what are we reporting on? Usually right? This can change from organization to organization, but usually at the very least.
Orlando Sequera: This is where we're going to report about
Orlando Sequera: our schedule.
Orlando Sequera: and we're going to be able to answer that question
Orlando Sequera: that our stakeholders have is my project on time? Is my project
Orlando Sequera: behind schedule or
Orlando Sequera: ahead of schedule.
Orlando Sequera: and for that we're going to use when we cover and value management, we're going to start seeing some metrics that can help us
Orlando Sequera: to understand that can be applied to any project we're going to learn about Spi, for example, scheduled performance index when we get to and running management.
Orlando Sequera: we also gonna provide information about our budget.
Orlando Sequera: Are we
Orlando Sequera: our budget on their budget? Or
Orlando Sequera: are we a on budget.
Orlando Sequera: right, or an information about risks?
Orlando Sequera: These are the risks that were identified? These are the risk that materialized and became issues, negative risks. And this is what we are doing.
Orlando Sequera: And because you're gonna those are the questions that you're gonna get. Most of that status report meeting. Have you ever been
Orlando Sequera: to
Orlando Sequera: to one of those? That is, those 3 topics are part of it. Usually that is the case. Okay, Of course they might be some additional topics, for mainly it's going to be. That is, the health of those are health indicators of your project
Orlando Sequera: in most situations.
Orlando Sequera: All right.
Orlando Sequera: Also.
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to
Orlando Sequera: knowing how to collaborate
Orlando Sequera: effective collaboration, we have to build trust. I can keep
Orlando Sequera: stress in that. Enough. We have to build trust with our team members with our stakeholders. This is about open dialogue and meaningful communication that helps to achieve and build that trust. Okay, and sharing the expectations of results, and what needs to be done?
Orlando Sequera: Everyone's involvement and engagement in the project may fluctuate or remain constant. In some cases, so not all stakeholders are going to keep keep the same level of engagement.
Orlando Sequera: That's what we're saying here.
Orlando Sequera: going back to the example of the software for the account and department. We have the director of accounting as one of the key stakeholders.
Orlando Sequera: They
Orlando Sequera: engagement.
Orlando Sequera: A level
Orlando Sequera: with our project is going to fluctuate. That is an individual that is very basic.
Orlando Sequera: They have other projects. They have operations.
Orlando Sequera: What is happening within the organization. So
Orlando Sequera: we it's a fact of life. It's going to fluctuate, but
Orlando Sequera: we have to work with them, Bill, from. They want that trust to make sure that when we need input from them
Orlando Sequera: they are
Orlando Sequera: available, or they can designate or delegate
Orlando Sequera: to another individual that will represent them. That will provide the information that the team members need. That is what we have to do. It's okay. They can delegate to someone else. But when we need the information
Orlando Sequera: they need to be available to provide that information. Otherwise the project is not
Orlando Sequera: going to be successful, so we' to make sure that they understand that a. We should keep our discussions transparent.
Orlando Sequera: If we have to give bad news.
Orlando Sequera: be open about it. It's okay. Set the right expectations. It's about sending the right expectations. Okay, If you keep them engaged. If you keep them in form, they're going to know they're going to be right there with you when that when those
Orlando Sequera: clouds start forming in the horizon. Okay, there, they'll see them right there with you. You don't have to even tell them if you do your due diligence. Okay, so. But it's about transparency and setting the right expectations. A.
Orlando Sequera: And then come Here's where your communication skills in your personal skills feedback meeting management. Among other management
Orlando Sequera: a skills are really handy and important.
Orlando Sequera: Leverage that maximize the feedback loop that you get
Orlando Sequera: that you can get from them and use
Orlando Sequera: effective tools like sample wipers or any other tools to achieve that goal.
Orlando Sequera: All right.
Orlando Sequera: I would like to take a look
Orlando Sequera: questions, and
Orlando Sequera: after that we're going to.
Orlando Sequera: We're going to take a break.
Orlando Sequera: so we
Orlando Sequera: so then we can.
Orlando Sequera: So then we'll come back and continue with the content.
Orlando Sequera: All right, so let me.
Orlando Sequera: is the communication management plan made only for predictive. If you see the work plan is mainly for predictive.
Orlando Sequera: Yes, but you still have a you need have. You need to have a communication approach for your adaptive projects as well.
Orlando Sequera: Are there any keywords phrases
Orlando Sequera: to let us know when to choose the
Orlando Sequera: a stakeholder and get some plan versus
Orlando Sequera: hmm, Not really a the questions i'm not going to be geared, or let me repeat the question. My apologies, my probably the question.
Orlando Sequera: Are there any keywords or phrases to let us know when to choose the stakeholder engagement plan versus the communication management plan in the exam. Usually the questions are not
Orlando Sequera: about choosing which plan they're not going to be around that these are
Orlando Sequera: the goal with these plans is to understand this.
Orlando Sequera: These are the rules that we're going to follow to address those specific areas. But there they don't
Orlando Sequera: ask you about that. They're going to give you a scenario
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: you have to fix the problem that they are
Orlando Sequera: presenting with that scenario. That's how the questions are going to be
Orlando Sequera: to get a better idea Again.
Orlando Sequera: I wholeheartedly recommend to take practice questions in desperate
Orlando Sequera: another question.
Orlando Sequera: What do you normally utilize instead of names
Orlando Sequera: for the stakeholder chart.
Orlando Sequera: How do you know specifically the person to influence? Well, that is.
Orlando Sequera: let me go back to that slide
Orlando Sequera: reference the stakeholder. Brid example you cover, please, and explain well your stakeholder register. The answer is your stakeholder register. Remember that list of stakeholders.
Orlando Sequera: It's a spreadsheet the the stakeholder registered you at that information. You you're going to have
Orlando Sequera: a information, the name, the contact information, who they are, what type of stakeholder, what is the level of influence in the project. That's where you're going to get that information from. But then the grid and i'm going to go back to
Orlando Sequera: the power and influence great for a second. This is after you have your stakeholder register in place. Do you want to perform some intel
Orlando Sequera: to understand? Okay.
Orlando Sequera: I have my stakeholder register. I'm going to place all of my stakeholders in this grid to understand which ones do I have to manage closely which ones I need to keep inform, for example, for the accounting
Orlando Sequera: department software project.
Orlando Sequera: then the director of accounting
Orlando Sequera: that's gonna be someone that has high power. Why is that because it is a director level, right? And then high interest, because it is the accounting software for the accounting department. So we have to manage this individual closely.
Orlando Sequera: but we also have
Orlando Sequera: some the people that work that works in the accounting department like accounts payable accounts receivable. They have
Orlando Sequera: low power, but they have a high interest. Those are going to be your end users. We need to keep them informed.
Orlando Sequera: Then we have people that are a the it director, for example, if someone that has high power.
Orlando Sequera: but they have
Orlando Sequera: a low interest in the project is not an it project it's a it's an accounting, Project? So you want to keep them satisfied. And then you have people, for example, the help desk operators
Orlando Sequera: that are gonna be supporting the from the the application. They have low power, and they have low interest. Do you monitor their expectations? And why? I'm not saying that a some stakeholders are more important than others. Necessarily.
Orlando Sequera: No. What we're saying here is that you have to prioritize. You have to prioritize. Okay, always do. You have to protest in your projects. And that's why we
Orlando Sequera: once we need to
Orlando Sequera: mostly which ones we need to keep satisfy which ones we need to keep in form, and we which ones. We need to a monitor, and we have to perform this throughout the project. These changes. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: So that is
Orlando Sequera: how
Orlando Sequera: this is intel work that we have to perform, and this is key. You need to know who your stakeholders are.
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: perform this intel work about your to understand
Orlando Sequera: a
Orlando Sequera: to prioritize their engagement.
Orlando Sequera: it's the communication plan and artifact. Yes.
Orlando Sequera: if so, wasn't it listed in the early artifact slide.
Orlando Sequera: Remember that that wasn't the full list right? Those were the typical ones. But yeah, it is one of the
Orlando Sequera: I I. It is one of the plans that you have to create for your project
Orlando Sequera: A. In the test Prep. Learning more. One of the questions has which plan to reference of both plans for options. My recommendation is always
Orlando Sequera: read. The question looks always for the best answer, because
Orlando Sequera: this is something. Thank you for asking that, by the way, because that will allow me to provide more insight about the Pmp. Exam. Questions with the Pmp. Exam. Questions. They are notorious
Orlando Sequera: 4.
Orlando Sequera: The fact that in many cases you're going to have
Orlando Sequera: 2 options, 2 answers that
Orlando Sequera: this, this these 2 answers are are good, either one. They're great, they they're good answers.
Orlando Sequera: but always look for the best. Answer: okay, you might have to that make sense always look for the best answer. We read the question. We read the question, understand exactly what they're asking you, and look for the best possible answer. That is my advice.
Orlando Sequera: Why are most of these communication slides listed as predictive? Only?
Orlando Sequera: Well, the thing is that the way communication is happening in that's a good question.
Orlando Sequera: Why are most of these communication slides listed as predictive only? Is there a reason that agile is so different for this topic in the short answer is, Yes.
Orlando Sequera: in agile we have built in ceremonies the agile approach has built in ceremonies that account even for the communication aspect they help with that. Do you have a little bit more more guideline in that aspect that we don't have
Orlando Sequera: with
Orlando Sequera: your with a predictive. So that's that's Why, we have
Orlando Sequera: constant engagement daily on a daily basis. We have the daily stand-up meeting for coordination it teams are working, Closely. So you have a better
Orlando Sequera: a more.
Orlando Sequera: They They involve many. It's on a daily basis. The product owner is working with a team on a daily basis. So do this near constant engagement what you have. If you're following a that approach. That's why.
Orlando Sequera: okay,
Orlando Sequera: all right.
Orlando Sequera: Should a Pm. Be put in a copy of all emails a team sense. My sure answer is yes, ideally yes.
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: sharing live reports with stakeholders live via sharepoint?
Orlando Sequera: Or is it better to send a report snapshot on a regular schedule. My answer is, Ask your
Orlando Sequera: stakeholders. What do they like? That's why we perform that communications requirement analysis. Ask your stakeholders. Do not assume what they want or what they like, ask them.
Orlando Sequera: and based on the answer.
Orlando Sequera: you go with
Orlando Sequera: their communication preference.
Orlando Sequera: Does the practice test question refer to which section of the boot camp it refers to. No.
Orlando Sequera: and neither. That's the Pmp. Exam.
Orlando Sequera: Everything is
Orlando Sequera: everything that we cover is part of the content that you will be tested on
Orlando Sequera: what criteria
Orlando Sequera: meet.
Orlando Sequera: what criteria me the expectation of satisfy stakeholders and stakeholder engagement
Orlando Sequera: that is based on
Orlando Sequera: your stakeholder
Orlando Sequera: analysis their communication preferences, so they again. They will provide that information for you.
Orlando Sequera: Ask them.
Orlando Sequera: and then try to meet
Orlando Sequera: that criteria.
Orlando Sequera: Do we get partial score? If we select any second priority option. The Pmp. Exam. Again. It's a password fail.
Orlando Sequera: Nobody knows, except pmi, how they score the exam, so
Orlando Sequera: it's a passive Fill exam. The the short answer is, no one knows, outside of Pmi
Orlando Sequera: how to select the best option out of 2 good answers by starting and getting ready for the exam, and taking multiple
Orlando Sequera: as many as possible. Practice questions for the Pmp. Exam. And understanding these definitions, getting ready for the exam.
Orlando Sequera: what will be the best answer
Orlando Sequera: on the Pmp. If there are critical filters one should use
Orlando Sequera: you will have to elaborate on what you mean by critical filters. Always look for the best answer
Orlando Sequera: to this specific scenario that you are answering.
Orlando Sequera: based on this tools and techniques
Orlando Sequera: that, and this content that we're covering these best practices that we're covering
Orlando Sequera: all right.
Orlando Sequera: When will we know that we're ready for the Pmp. Exam. When you consistently start
Orlando Sequera: getting 80% or more in the simulators.
Orlando Sequera: That's a good indication. It's not always a guarantee, but it's a good indication. So rule of
Orlando Sequera: our test spread not limited to a number of trials. Nope. And you can take that as many
Orlando Sequera: time that's needed.
Orlando Sequera: Can you tell us again what is an artifact special document that we prepare for for our project. Right? Your stakeholder register. It's an example. Your word Breakdown structure is an example. Your risk register is an example of a of of an artifact.
Orlando Sequera: but documentation will be the emails that you send to your vendors training documentation, right? So in a way, they're similar to documentation. But they're a little bit more involved, is it? Think of it as
Orlando Sequera: instruments for a lack of a better work.
Orlando Sequera: To that you need to use in order to manage your project
Orlando Sequera: right?
Orlando Sequera: We are going to take a break, and when we come back we're going to continue with the content.
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: we will. We will be back.
Orlando Sequera: We are back, and we are going to continue
Orlando Sequera: with
Orlando Sequera: the class. I was reviewing the Q. And a. But I don't really see that many
Orlando Sequera: questions that are content related. So we're going to continue.
Orlando Sequera: and we
Orlando Sequera: we talked about this. We talked about this for a communication
Orlando Sequera: matrix, and we we mentioned the importance of active listening
Orlando Sequera: and effective feedback, and we also talked about
Orlando Sequera: reports and formal communication, and also how to collaborate super important.
Orlando Sequera: And now we're going to talk about
Orlando Sequera: information radiators. This is
Orlando Sequera: for
Orlando Sequera: agile projects, and this artifact is going to help us to
Orlando Sequera: This is the artifact that we can use that is going to help us to
Orlando Sequera: he
Orlando Sequera: all the work visible to any of our stakeholders
Orlando Sequera: since.
Orlando Sequera: and you might be wondering why Don't, we have the same approach that we have in predictive in which we have those styles meetings. There's not really
Orlando Sequera: time for that. We have to be as efficient as possible with the time.
Orlando Sequera: So
Orlando Sequera: for that reason.
Orlando Sequera: since we're working in this short iterations.
Orlando Sequera: it is a better idea to keep all that work, all the information visible.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: An example of an information radiator is going to be a Camden board. We're going to watch a video in in less than 5, but
Orlando Sequera: just want to make sure that you understand that this is a a tool that is used in.
Orlando Sequera: Add your projects.
Orlando Sequera: Any shows
Orlando Sequera: this. It's a graphic representation of the work. We have multiple columns. We have the list of user stories that are in the to do list. We have. The team has to start to work on them. We have the list of user stories that are being worked on right now. What this, what
Orlando Sequera: the team is developing at this particular point we have another column. That might be the list of user stories or requirements or features that are being tested right now, that's another column, 200.
Orlando Sequera: Another column might be
Orlando Sequera: a your. They they list of user. Stories that are blocked. You might have some blocked items, and another column might be the list of features or user stories that are done. So. Anyone that would like to understand
Orlando Sequera: a the status of the project. You can refer them to the information radiator. That's how you save
Orlando Sequera: a time, and you are more efficient in providing status. You can refer them to to the information radiator, and they can get
Orlando Sequera: in real time
Orlando Sequera: information about the health of the project. They help with communication and collaboration. They they also, they can
Orlando Sequera: a help with innovation. They can start conversations and collaborations when they, when the stakeholders a
Orlando Sequera: review it it
Orlando Sequera: you might be wondering how do, how do we? How do we do? How do we make this happen? How can we build an information radiator? Basically, there are 2 ways
Orlando Sequera: you can, if you, if your team is co-located, and this is
Orlando Sequera: how many teams, and even to this day. Sometimes I still do do it that way. They build the information radiator in a whole way.
Orlando Sequera: right? That is close to the area.
Orlando Sequera: The location of the team, so anybody that can walk behind if they wanted to understand the status of the pro, they can.
Orlando Sequera: It's it's a low tech way of printing the information radiator. But that's going to be there in the whole way, so it's not a necessarily high tech, but nowadays most
Orlando Sequera: so are using tools like Jira, for example, version one a trello that allow you to create a digital version of an information radiator, and they give a access to any any stakeholder, and of course, the team members. So they
Orlando Sequera: a keep it updated for you, and if they work as the work gets done, the team members. They are the ones that are going to be a updating
Orlando Sequera: the information radiator as the work gets done. This helps with
Orlando Sequera: responsibility, with visibility, because all the members are going to. We're working on the same information radiator, and it keeps everything in the same place.
Okay.
Orlando Sequera: also.
Orlando Sequera: A. And this is for agile
Orlando Sequera: stakeholder collaboration happens on
Orlando Sequera: the basis in a major project
Orlando Sequera: we have agile has,
Orlando Sequera: as part of the approach has, or the framework has built in ceremonies that help
Orlando Sequera: with this
Orlando Sequera: a engagement that needs to happen on a daily basis. That's why we, the previous slice that we saw about communication planning were mostly geared towards
Orlando Sequera: predictive. But in edge of this collaboration has to happen nearly it's nearly constant, so we have
Orlando Sequera: daily stand up meetings.
Orlando Sequera: Sure. These are not status meetings. As we learn, we ideally have our team members co-located, or
Orlando Sequera: A. If we don't have. If allocation is not a possibility.
Orlando Sequera: we have the technology we have the tools to make sure that they're using all the proper tools to communicate closely. Microsoft team, for example, and you have your channels for your team. You have ways for them to communicate, and the the communication. The engagement is nearly constant.
Orlando Sequera: or you can have some schedule. You're gonna have also some scheduled sessions. You might go over
Orlando Sequera: milestone reviews, backlog refinement sessions to work with the product owner, to understand
Orlando Sequera: the scope.
Orlando Sequera: What in the per backlog
Orlando Sequera: get clarification on some items a make sure that this, that the product is prioritized, based on the
Orlando Sequera: features or user stories that add the most value to the business.
Orlando Sequera: A
Orlando Sequera: You might have a project update meetings as well, Nigel. They're not a only exclusive for predictive. It's possible to have them, even if you've following an imagined approach it. You also, for collaboration, have parent, which is put in a couple of
Orlando Sequera: team members working together. Maybe you can have a senior or well of
Orlando Sequera: An experience team member working with a team member. That is a a little bit more green. They're starting their career. You can do that that's for planning, coaching, and that works in order to transfer. And also another collaboration. Activity is going to be negotiation.
Orlando Sequera: Everything negotiation is very important. This is going to happen a lot.
Orlando Sequera: Everything is going to negotiate
Orlando Sequera: internally on daily work roles, a assignment, and so on.
Orlando Sequera: External communications
Orlando Sequera: can include contract negotiations
Orlando Sequera: with suppliers or vendors.
Orlando Sequera: or agreements with external stakeholders. So negotiations are going to happen, and think of them as
Orlando Sequera: conversations with either internal or external parties with the goal to reach an agreement. And again, when it comes to negotiation.
Orlando Sequera: the key word is going to be again communication. Make sure that you use communication methods
Orlando Sequera: to ensure collaboration with the other party.
Orlando Sequera: because the goal is to reach consensus and ideally keep at keep a positive tone
Orlando Sequera: to help increase the likelihood of success. So that's important.
Orlando Sequera: Another aspect of
Orlando Sequera: projects. You're gonna have
Orlando Sequera: multiple meetings, meetings, meetings, meetings, meetings. I know that some of you it might be
Orlando Sequera: A.
Orlando Sequera: It might be tired of so many meetings that we have. They are
Orlando Sequera: useful if they are manage
Orlando Sequera: properly, Meetings can be useful, and meeting management is important. A few things that
Orlando Sequera: I will recommend you to use
Orlando Sequera: is starts with being organized even before the meeting.
Orlando Sequera: Create an agenda.
Orlando Sequera: Send that agenda
Orlando Sequera: not
Orlando Sequera: half an hour before the meeting. Send the agenda a few days before the meeting.
Orlando Sequera: A. Be specific with the purpose of the meeting. Make sure that you validate the audience.
Orlando Sequera: the participants that are going to be attending that meeting
Orlando Sequera: I have been able to learn. I didn't know this before, but I was able to learn that
Orlando Sequera: there's another profession. I don't know if it's a new profession. Maybe not, but I didn't notice before, but I have learned that there are some professional meeting attenders.
Orlando Sequera: There are some people I don't know how they do it, but I have gotten to know a few professional meeting attendees
Orlando Sequera: meeting attendees, so
Orlando Sequera: we want to make sure that we invite the right people for our meetings, so
Orlando Sequera: prepare the agenda, send it to.
Orlando Sequera: They brought the appropriate parties, make sure that they have a time to get ready for the meeting assign.
Orlando Sequera: if we need be assigned, some of the topics in the agenda to specific people. Give them time
Orlando Sequera: to prepare a
Orlando Sequera: time box. The discussions okay, By that we mean, if the meeting is
Orlando Sequera: an hour long, stick to that hour or less
Orlando Sequera: during the meeting during the meeting.
Orlando Sequera: Chances are that you're going to be the facilitator.
Orlando Sequera: and one important aspect of being a meeting facilitator is try to avoid digressing. Try to make sure that people are sticking to the topics that are being covered.
Orlando Sequera: and if you start having people that start going for rabbit host, and by that I mean
Orlando Sequera: people that are starting going in different directions from the topics that are being covered during the meeting bring their attention back to the topics, and if you need to have separate meetings to go over those topics, make sure that you clarify that, and schedule those. But
Orlando Sequera: do not let the minutes to be derailed.
Orlando Sequera: That's a that's when meetings are not effective at all. Okay, so
Orlando Sequera: proper meeting meeting etiquette is is to follow. Then
Orlando Sequera: stick to the time duration.
Orlando Sequera: Do not go over
Orlando Sequera: people. You can give a few minutes back. If I don't possible a
Orlando Sequera: practice active listening to feedback and take many minutes.
Orlando Sequera: If you are
Orlando Sequera: the facilitator, and you don't have someone that Can you designate a subscribe to take me the minutes.
Orlando Sequera: then make sure that you at least
Orlando Sequera: are writing down
Orlando Sequera: the action items that need to
Orlando Sequera: that that will follow up after the meeting at the very least. But take meeting minutes
Orlando Sequera: document. Those made it minutes. In some cases you have the ability to record the meeting, but in some cases it's not going to be possible. Find out if that's a possibility that might help.
Orlando Sequera: But please make sure that you have you designate someone to take many minutes, or if you're doing it, at least you capture the action. Items facilitate the collaboration, give people the chance to talk.
Orlando Sequera: to give people the chance to express their ideas and
Orlando Sequera: make sure that you
Orlando Sequera: adjourn the meeting properly, and follow up with those many minutes in action items so people can get ready for the next meeting, if need be. So they, if they are used properly. They're very effective, and people are going to. People are going to pay attention, and people are going to
Orlando Sequera: People are going to like to participate in your meetings. If you are, if you follow these guidelines, okay, and the team especially the team, because they might be the first one that that are a not really happy with those cleaning. So this is going.
Orlando Sequera: But if they're used properly they're very powerful to together information that is needed. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: all right. And
Orlando Sequera: again, we have our
Orlando Sequera: theme or stakeholder engagement, assessment matrix, and we're trying to determine our day supporting our our project. Are they the tractors or the Sisters? Are they a neutral? We have that changes that changes that level of stakeholder engagement as a changes. So we have to update the same
Orlando Sequera: throughout the life cycle of the project a. Keep them engaged as needed. Remember that Ideally, we shouldn't Have anyone
Orlando Sequera: a
Orlando Sequera: against your project. We shouldn't Have your sisters, or we shouldn't have
Orlando Sequera: A detractors
Orlando Sequera: should at least have neutral stakeholders. Okay, so work with them. And what are the tools that we use? Well in a personal skills. Active, listening negotiation.
Orlando Sequera: Use the emotional intelligence as as much as possible, and expertise to measure the level of engagement of your stakeholders.
Orlando Sequera: And this is what we have covered. These are the topics that we have covered. We have talked about managing
Orlando Sequera: a communications, communicate project information and updates effectively. We also talked about
Orlando Sequera: The importance of confirming that the message was the lever and understood, and the feedback was received.
Orlando Sequera: We also talked about leading the team.
Orlando Sequera: and, like team members of stakeholders influence engage in our stakeholders, collaborating with our stakeholders and being able to evaluate and deliver project benefits
Orlando Sequera: in value.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: Now
Orlando Sequera: we are going to
Orlando Sequera: talk about training, coaching and mentoring. Okay, so let's move away from collaboration. Now, we're going to talk about training our team members and our stakeholders as well.
Orlando Sequera: So this is about work being able to work together. Remember what I mentioned before. We are in the business of developing people.
Orlando Sequera: and ideally we should foster a knowledge sharing culture that's what's going to help us to be successful. Remember, we said before about a. It's ideally we we should have T-shaped people or generalized specialists.
Orlando Sequera: This is one way of achieving that goal. We should foster a knowledge sharing culture. Is knowledge. Hoarding is a major. No, no.
Orlando Sequera: we can have single points of failure. We don't want to have a knowledge Horden. It's not job security. It's a No, no. In this in this particular context. Okay, it's about knowledge sharing we should. It's about training the team help them to improve their skill set.
Orlando Sequera: We're always learning something new, coaching them with best practices, and they shouldn't happen as part of the project, and sometimes even outside of the project. So it is. It is important.
Orlando Sequera: Team members are going to learn from
Orlando Sequera: A from other team members, and they're going to teach other team members.
Orlando Sequera: This is for everyone. It's not just for the team members. It's also about the stakeholders, because if we can coach them to be better stakeholders, they can make best use of what we're producing for them with the with the
Orlando Sequera: with the project that ultimately it's going to be benef. It's going to benefit the organization. Okay, and that is part of continuous improvement.
Orlando Sequera: There are some project roles that are specifically dedicated to knowledge, sharing like agile coaches that help organizations and teams in their edge of transformation journeys.
Orlando Sequera: And this is crucial
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to product delivery. When we are transitioning our project into a live environment, and also helps with those transition planning efforts that we mentioned before. It's not just building the product service of result. We have to think
Orlando Sequera: beyond that. We have to also take into account the delivery aspect
Orlando Sequera: when and by that I mean, when our product service over salt, it's going to be transition to production, and the working session is going to start using it, whatever it is that we're producing, whether it is a software for the accounting department, a mobile app, or a new streaming service, or a
Orlando Sequera: anything, for that matter that we're building with our project
Orlando Sequera: when it comes to training
Orlando Sequera: and mentoring
Orlando Sequera: a training is very specific. It's about learning, a skill set to use in the present right? And you can do this individually.
Orlando Sequera: or you can do it as a group.
Orlando Sequera: It's also known as upscaling, and it could be in any
Orlando Sequera: on basically any topic.
Orlando Sequera: coaching is
Orlando Sequera: a little more involved.
Orlando Sequera: It's about sharing
Orlando Sequera: new skills or better ways of doing things.
Orlando Sequera: and it can also be
Orlando Sequera: it done in an individual fashion or as a group.
Orlando Sequera: and it's about putting learning into practice. But it's a little more long term than just training for me is for the present coaching.
Orlando Sequera: You have a relationship building element that makes it a little more long term compared to training You're building relationships through training and mentoring even more so. Mentoring is long term relationships. It's about building
Orlando Sequera: It's about professional growth over time when people have mentors and mentees that learn from people that are highly trained, specialized, and their subject matter experts in the organization with specific topic.
Orlando Sequera: They can work with these people that are new to that discipline or field, and they would like to learn. But it's about relationship building. And this goes beyond the project. Okay, so it's a long term relationship. So those are the main differences between
Orlando Sequera: training coaching and mentoring in the project management. Usually the first 2. Those are the ones that occur. It's about training. Remember that chances are that you're not going to have a 100%. The skill set
Orlando Sequera: present on day, one with your team members. It's okay. You can work with them to train them.
Orlando Sequera: and also coaching in best practices. That also happens in project management.
Orlando Sequera: How to acquire
Orlando Sequera: that require competencies
Orlando Sequera: once everyone is aware of their starting points, and conscious of what unique knowledge or skill set they're going to need.
Orlando Sequera: It is time to act.
Orlando Sequera: Remember, we are in
Orlando Sequera: the business of
Orlando Sequera: growing and developing people. So
Orlando Sequera: work on understanding. What type of training do the team members need, or the stakeholders so take into account the topic the death of the the training, the schedule, the format, and then
Orlando Sequera: the training has to.
Orlando Sequera: Again, the customers business culture you got to take into account. They desire out comes to the training and
Orlando Sequera: also within the project context
Orlando Sequera: and encourage mentorships. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: you have to plan for this training.
Orlando Sequera: You start by performing a gap analysis to understand those training gaps that you might have
Orlando Sequera: plan for
Orlando Sequera: suitable diversity of training and coaching offerings. So
Orlando Sequera: people can understand when
Orlando Sequera: So you. You have a combination of soft skills and time your skills, and this can be a way also
Orlando Sequera: to build trust with the team to to for team building.
Orlando Sequera: The timing of the training is super important.
Orlando Sequera: One brutal fund is, and this is one recommendation. Training
Orlando Sequera: on your implementation should be done as close as possible at the last responsible moment prior to implementation. Why is that? Let's assume for a minute that we're talking about
Orlando Sequera: the software that we're developing for the accounting department. The training that the users can.
Orlando Sequera: prior to our deployment to production when that software for the coming department goes, live should occur as close as possible to deployment
Orlando Sequera: when we go live.
Orlando Sequera: Otherwise people are going to forget, and the training is not going to be as effective.
Orlando Sequera: In some cases. You might need to
Orlando Sequera: try going back to your team members. Do you mind me to train your team members to be certified
Orlando Sequera: it to have specific certifications? That's Why, you see here a. The Pmp. Pmiacp, etc. Those are examples of certifications.
Orlando Sequera: but
Orlando Sequera: it it might be other types of certifications that they need make sure. And I can tell you, for example, in in Aerospace
Orlando Sequera: Beef, those are engineers that were sitting in console when when we launch Artemis one, for example.
Orlando Sequera: to be sailing, console. You have to go through a lot of certifications. You have to have that in place, and you have to take that into account in your project project planning efforts for training. Make sure that they get frame and they get certified before they can sit on console. In this case. Okay, you got to take that into account and try to encourage
Orlando Sequera: mentorship with some value stakeholders that can help others.
Orlando Sequera: It is also important to know
Orlando Sequera: the value of training, coaching and mentoring
Orlando Sequera: a try to perform a cost, benefit analysis, to understand the value and training because a couple of implications you may be wondering, oh, great!
Orlando Sequera: But
Orlando Sequera: how how can this training come to friction? Is it going to affect my my budget? And this is going to affect my schedule? And the answer is, yes, that's why we're planning for it. Put You need to conduct the cost, benefit analysis to justify the training, he said.
Orlando Sequera: Worth training, or is it better to hire someone that already has that knowledge
Orlando Sequera: you get up in? In some? In some cases the answer is going to be, it's gonna the the learning curve is very steep, so it's better to go with someone that already has the knowledge.
Orlando Sequera: a help, others, or yourself to improve your skills and knowledge.
Orlando Sequera: This is gonna by coaching, training and mentoring. You're going to increase the team's ability to increase the quality output and value, and it's going to help you in building thrust and relationships between stakeholders and team members.
Orlando Sequera: Hey, have you ever had a valuable trainer, coach, or mentor? I'm going to venture to say that the answer is yes. In 99.9% of the cases for you. So it is important to leverage that as much as possible.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: a few elements
Orlando Sequera: that are associated with training.
Orlando Sequera: Framing can be done in multiple ways. You can provide
Orlando Sequera: train into individuals, you can provide train to groups. These can be small groups or they can be large
Orlando Sequera: it you can cover pretty much any topic may managerial, technical, or administrative.
Orlando Sequera: and the way trainings are delivered nowadays we have multiple flavors for that. It can be an instructor left classroom. It can be a virtual classroom like this One can be self-paced
Orlando Sequera: through e-learning document reviews, interactive simulations, or on the job trainings. Think about
Orlando Sequera: the delivery models.
Orlando Sequera: My recommendation is for your projects.
Orlando Sequera: Use more than one. Don't. Rely just on this is a common pitfall that I have seen is that we
Orlando Sequera: work with the team in creating documentation, and we gave a documentation to to the stakeholders, and that's it well self-paced.
Orlando Sequera: A document review.
Orlando Sequera: We posted the document, the documentation a we uploaded that to sharepoint. Here it is, Mr.
Orlando Sequera: And Mr. Customer Misses customer. There you go. You're You're trained. Read the document, and you're trained. No, Some cases they're depending on what it is. That's that's gonna work in some situations, but depending on the complexity of the service product or result that we're delivering with our project, we have to use
Orlando Sequera: other modalities right? It could be train the trainer to be a virtual classroom, Whatever works for our specific situation.
Orlando Sequera: a
Orlando Sequera: also coach, the team coaching teams and individuals and project management.
Orlando Sequera: try to pay attention to informal opportunities, delegate tasks, even in product management, to help them to grow, encourage others to take lead.
Orlando Sequera: or
Orlando Sequera: from collaboration for the management tasks. I do that. So our team members learn a little bit about the importance of project management. Some of them can be a neo-fy when they comes to project management, but it is a good practice to let them get a little bit of a of a taste of what, for example.
Orlando Sequera: So that's a informal way of doing it, or have for more opportunities for
Orlando Sequera: a coaching
Orlando Sequera: facilitate meetings and sessions.
Orlando Sequera: transfer skills by parent individuals. Usually someone that has a lot of experience with someone that has less experience
Orlando Sequera: and more importantly modeled behaviors.
Orlando Sequera: Coaching group of groups and and individuals. As I mentioned before, you can work with the whole team. You can coach the individual, and then.
Orlando Sequera: if this is for agile
Orlando Sequera: whole thing coaching during iteration, planning at the beginning of the iteration.
Orlando Sequera: coaching helps individuals to the Well of Agile and from the solving skills.
Orlando Sequera: And then, at the end of the iteration, you have
Orlando Sequera: another session for
Orlando Sequera: coaching the entire team during the retrospective, which is another ceremony that occurs at the end of the iteration in which we go over lessons, learn
Orlando Sequera: a
Orlando Sequera: that we.
Orlando Sequera: in that particular iteration. What one will.
Orlando Sequera: what, when run, what can be improved? Okay. Multiple opportunities, regardless of the approach. This is applicable to agile and predictive, a coaching, mentoring and training.
Orlando Sequera: How do
Orlando Sequera: self-organizing teams collaborate self-organizing
Orlando Sequera: code for agile so we're talking about agile
Orlando Sequera: e we have to encourage teams agile teams to self organize. We've not telling them what to do. They have to be self-organized and take initiative
Orlando Sequera: coach individuals on how to contribute with other project rose like the product Owner, for example.
Orlando Sequera: coach an individual with
Orlando Sequera: That's it. Knowledge
Orlando Sequera: that it Knowledge is
Orlando Sequera: personal knowledge that can be difficult to articulate. It's also known as tribal knowledge.
Orlando Sequera: This is about experience. This is about insights. This is of our beliefs. An example. Does it knowledge? Learning how to drive right? It's you. You learn by doing so. There are some things that are harder to the hard to articulate so. But nonetheless there's still knowledge.
Orlando Sequera: So coach and individual with tested knowledge, use, serve and leadership.
Orlando Sequera: You drop shadowing.
Orlando Sequera: coaching, or mentoring during transitions. So you
Orlando Sequera: knowledge and skills.
Orlando Sequera: That's when we are deploying to the live environment.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: another important aspect we have. After the training is perform, we have to show value for the for the training
Orlando Sequera: we have to be able to for to perform a post-training performance assessment
Orlando Sequera: to justify the investment. We're spending money on time on the training so we gotta get our return on investment.
Orlando Sequera: We do that for post-training performance, assessments, observation of knowledge and skill, improvement
Orlando Sequera: showing the certifications right. If we got if we needed to get Pmp. Certified.
Orlando Sequera: Here we go we are Pmp. Certified and have a retrospective session to go over the training outcomes. The lessons, learn
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: always try to convert the learning into active use of knowledge.
Okay.
Orlando Sequera: And if the desired outcomes were not achieved.
Orlando Sequera: use the retrospective document that outcome and try to find out the reason for that.
Orlando Sequera: It's also important to keep the mentorships
Orlando Sequera: longer term partnerships. They're going to enable professional growth.
Orlando Sequera: This is, connects. Mentorship is long term, as we said.
Orlando Sequera: a job shadow in engagement. They help with transfer of explicit knowledge that one we can articulate right. We can put that in a document and t it. Knowledge
Orlando Sequera: that one is that type of knowledge is transfer through experiences, Tribal knowledge. You learn by doing.
Orlando Sequera: You have to tailor the the context and desire engagement
Orlando Sequera: to your organization. Some organizations have mentorship programs in place. NASA has it, and multiple private sector organizations have mentorship programs in place that help
Orlando Sequera: A, for example, to train project managers and they help, they may use reporting to guide development. What? What other organizations they follow a more informal approach.
Orlando Sequera: All right.
Orlando Sequera: What have we cover so far? We talked about building the team.
Orlando Sequera: We talked about
Orlando Sequera: making sure that our team members and stakeholders are properly trained.
Orlando Sequera: Make sure that you remember that we have to plan for this training, and this training is going to have an impact on our budget, and also an impact on our schedule. And should not one thing that I didn't mention is important for training.
Orlando Sequera: Having a training should not be a reason for you, for example, to extend the schedule of your project. That's why we have to take it into account in our planning efforts. Okay, this is not a justification. Oh, we have to train our users. We're going to have to to extend the schedule
Orlando Sequera: for 3 more weeks. No, that's poor project management. You don't want to do that. You have to
Orlando Sequera: incorporate training
Orlando Sequera: in your planning efforts. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: And you also gotta work on mentoring relevant stakeholders.
Orlando Sequera: So that's what we have covered so far.
Orlando Sequera: Having said that we are going to move on to the next topic, and then
Orlando Sequera: this topic is important, and then i'm going to work on, addressing
Orlando Sequera: any questions that you might have
Orlando Sequera: conflict management super important for the Exempt. You should expect questions related to conflict management
Orlando Sequera: in your exam. Probably more than one.
Orlando Sequera: Make sure that you are
Orlando Sequera: well, first of all paying attention right now, and also sharp when it comes to conflict management. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: and let's start with conflict. Why
Orlando Sequera: conflict manager matters?
Orlando Sequera: Let me start by saying that conflict is unavoidable. You're not going to be able to
Orlando Sequera: avoid conflict. You're working with people. Conflict is going to happen. But basically we are going to have
Orlando Sequera: 2 types of conflict
Orlando Sequera: we have
Orlando Sequera: good or positive conflict.
Orlando Sequera: and that we also know, and the formal, the formal name of positive or good conflict is functional conflict.
Orlando Sequera: And this is the conflict that occurs when.
Orlando Sequera: for example, when the team members are going through the storming face
Orlando Sequera: and they have
Orlando Sequera: they, there are some conflict situations during storming, and they trying to exert power, and they say, Well, in my previous project
Orlando Sequera: during the shuttle days we did it.
Orlando Sequera: We solve that problem this way. But then you have Team Member B. That is saying No. But remember, this is different. I have work. When I in my days in Spacex. We solve that same problem
Orlando Sequera: that way
Orlando Sequera: totally different. So that's conflict. That's a comfort. Right?
Orlando Sequera: They're they're brought in. H: that's that's a conflict. Right. There, but
Orlando Sequera: is conflict.
Orlando Sequera: It's functional conflict. It's okay. Functional conflict is okay. Not all conflict is back. Not all conflict is negative
Orlando Sequera: negative conflict is When
Orlando Sequera: this situation or bad conflict. Negative conflict is when the conflict is about
Orlando Sequera: something personal when it's taken to a personal level, and we call that this functional conflict, that type of conflict has no room
Orlando Sequera: in the workplace period.
Orlando Sequera: that is, there's no room for that that is not allowed, and that is usually addressed with the simpler sanctions. When it comes to this functional conflict, we shouldn't. Let
Orlando Sequera: functional conflict to escalate, to become
Orlando Sequera: this functional conflict, because it can happen, if we are not effective in our conflict. Management
Orlando Sequera: approach.
Orlando Sequera: Functional conflict can escalate, can evolve to this functional conflict. And that's where
Orlando Sequera: this destructive behavior that we're seeing here occurs, animosity occurs and people can work together, and that's a morale killer and also a productivity killer. So we have to be on top of
Orlando Sequera: a conflict. May situations watching like hawks on top of it, keeping a poll speed of any
Orlando Sequera: of any conflict situation. But remember, not all conflict is Pat so effective. Conflict management is going to help you with build a better understanding, better performance and also higher productivity.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: as a server leader, you assist in removing impediments or sources of conflict.
Orlando Sequera: Okay, imagined projects. The team lead is come, team, leader, scrum, master. It's going to facilitate conflict resolution, sessions.
Orlando Sequera: or that a for the team it. But the team is empowered to resolve conflicts as they best see fit, because agile teams are self-organize themselves, Manage
Orlando Sequera: what are the roles when it comes to conflict management.
Orlando Sequera: The first.
Orlando Sequera: the first name
Orlando Sequera: bullet point that we see here. Everyone is responsible for managing conflict.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: it's not always up to the project manager. We can influence. We can help, and being servant leaders to help the team. But
Orlando Sequera: everything starts with the parties that are involved in the conflict situation. If that doesn't work that's when we as project managers can
Orlando Sequera: a step in and help the team in solving
Orlando Sequera: a the conflict situation, address in the conflict situation, it using our inner personal skills, active, listening, emotional intelligence, etc. And our server leadership approach
Orlando Sequera: in module teams. The team is in power to resolve conflicts, but
Orlando Sequera: in some cases, if need be, the team lead can facilitate the resolution.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: where this conflict come from.
Orlando Sequera: These are the common causes. It might be competition. That's why we have to instill and drive that awareness about there's no I in team. It's about team commitments, not individual commitments.
Orlando Sequera: It might also come from different sensing objectives, values, and perceptions.
Orlando Sequera: That's why we have to work on making sure that we we define, we create our project, charter. We define our values as a team, and we're all on the same page the next one. When we have this agreements about road requirements, work activities and individual approaches. That's why we create a racing matrix.
Orlando Sequera: To prevent this from happening, we provide Cardi
Orlando Sequera: with the racing matrix. We create a race matrix to avoid as much as possible this
Orlando Sequera: type of conflict, because it it's very common. It's very common
Orlando Sequera: to avoid another cost of config communication breakdowns. That's why we're creating a communication management plan. That's why we train a communication strategy. That's why we have been naming communication so many times throughout the content.
Orlando Sequera: The conting for this Pmp preparation class, and we also need to keep in mind that projects are unique by nature, by definition.
Orlando Sequera: and in some cases this thing members have not worked together before, so that might be another cause of conflict.
Orlando Sequera: So we have to be able to address that we might be navigating a lot of complexity that that drives anxiety. So we have to work on addressing those situations. This is unavoidable. It's going to happen. We can try to minimize it.
Orlando Sequera: but
Orlando Sequera: it is going to happen when you work with people
Orlando Sequera: A
Orlando Sequera: in a. If If
Orlando Sequera: we have also been saying that we need to build and foster a psychologically safe environment that's
Orlando Sequera: also gonna help when it comes to
Orlando Sequera: a manage conflict in a positive way.
Orlando Sequera: If we're working a psychological, safe work, environment.
Orlando Sequera: the disruption and innovation, we view this disruption and innovation as connected.
Orlando Sequera: We encourage exchanges in this agreement, and we prevent
Orlando Sequera: to conflict, to go from functional to this functional.
Orlando Sequera: How can we manage conflict.
Orlando Sequera: We use prefer ways
Orlando Sequera: of managing conflict from the team, charter and ground rules. This is why we create
Orlando Sequera: our team charter and on our ground rules to help us to manage conflict as much as possible. They give us guidance. So this is if we're following a predictive approach. If we're following an agile approach.
Orlando Sequera: Agile teams they also have. They specified their conflict management strategies in their way of working, and they are supported by a culture of trust. So the goal is to when you're managing conflict. This there's a key aspect. You gotta focus on the issue, not on the individuals, not on the people is.
Orlando Sequera: you have to focus on the issues.
Orlando Sequera: A:
Orlando Sequera: This is an all. This is a representation of
Orlando Sequera: the different levels of conflicts. This is, there's an author. His name is Speed Lease.
Orlando Sequera: A. He created many, many years ago. I think he was back in the sixties. If i'm not mistaken, he created this model of the levels of conflict. Okay and conflict can I can intensify it can go from a problem to solve. So right here
Orlando Sequera: we are in levels one and 2, a problem to solve on this agreement. That is functional conflict.
Orlando Sequera: But
Orlando Sequera: we can let it escalate because it's going to go from level
Orlando Sequera: if it goes all the way to level 3. This is where people are taking sides. Then it starts becoming personal. Do you? Do you want to handle conflict
Orlando Sequera: in these 2 levels ideally in the first one.
Orlando Sequera: Keep it in the first one problem to solve, maybe possibly a disagreement.
Orlando Sequera: But
Orlando Sequera: you do not. It it starts becoming personal and even at the disagreement level it.
Orlando Sequera: So we that is dangerous. Okay, so ideally, most conflict has to be resolved here in this level one. We kind of let it go all the way up to
Orlando Sequera: it on flight. That is intervention here. You need hr
Orlando Sequera: a already it's it beyond beyond fixing, and then 5. This is where this. This is also known as war, by the way, and people are incapable of having a clear understanding of issues. They are trying to destroy others, and
Orlando Sequera: this is not allowed in the workplace. So you get a dress conflict here.
Orlando Sequera: ideally in level one.
Okay.
Orlando Sequera: Otherwise you're going to be in trouble.
Orlando Sequera: And what can you use to
Orlando Sequera: manage conflict? Do you use emotional intelligence.
Orlando Sequera: especially empathy, to understand? And the few situations.
Orlando Sequera: You used your leadership
Orlando Sequera: to your others in a more positive direction, decision making
Orlando Sequera: active, listening. Listen for personalize a
Orlando Sequera: accusing language and better classic tone that's look! Pay attention to that. Try to minimize that as much as possible.
Orlando Sequera: a
Orlando Sequera: influencing
Orlando Sequera: You have to try to do your best to persuade parties to reconsider or change your tone, approach or mindset, and when it comes to
Orlando Sequera: conflict management we also have some recommended
Orlando Sequera: tools and techniques that will help you to manage conflict. There are some techniques.
Orlando Sequera: of course
Orlando Sequera: they depend on
Orlando Sequera: the intensity and the importance of the conflict.
Orlando Sequera: They also
Orlando Sequera: they also rely on the time given to resolve the conflict.
Orlando Sequera: the type of conflict that you're that you're dealing with ideally functional, not this functional Don't. Let it don't. Let it get to that point. If if it's going to be too late, so try to keep it on the level one.
Orlando Sequera: And these are the different tools that we have to address conflict
Orlando Sequera: we have. The first one is smoothing and accommodating
Orlando Sequera: this
Orlando Sequera: type of
Orlando Sequera: comfort, resolution, technique
Orlando Sequera: is when you try to emphasize areas of agreement.
Orlando Sequera: or when you're trying, and when you're trying to consider position to maintain harmony and relationship. But unfortunately.
Orlando Sequera: this type of conflict management approach is like a band. Date is short term
Orlando Sequera: you you're not because it doesn't address
Orlando Sequera: your
Orlando Sequera: the the root cost of the conflict.
Orlando Sequera: It is a temporary band date that we're putting
Orlando Sequera: to address the comfort that is moving and accommodating
Orlando Sequera: examples of that. It happens a lot between countries that have different positions and disputes. They many cases they they try, they use moving and accommodating.
Orlando Sequera: But then,
Orlando Sequera: a few months later, a few years later, then the the conflicts and merch again.
Orlando Sequera: Another conflict management up conflict, management, resolution, technique, is avoidance or with role. You might be wondering how, how.
Orlando Sequera: with thrown or avoiding is
Orlando Sequera: a way to soft comfort it Sometimes you need to regroup. You need to get more information
Orlando Sequera: about the conflict, and then, in order to come up with a better solution, so that it retreat from the situation plus foundation. Th: that's valid in some situations that
Orlando Sequera: that what? That's what needs to happen at least initially. And then we can use another another type of comfort, resolution, technique, compromise, or reconcile. This is
Orlando Sequera: a little bit better. This is this is where you incorporate multiple viewpoints and is about open dialogue to reach consensus and
Orlando Sequera: enable cooperative add it to store solving a problem.
Orlando Sequera: But this is also another mandate. Unfortunately, this is not long term not. It's not long term. It's another mandate that we're doing that we're putting the same as smoothing and accommodating. We're not addressing a root cost of the problem.
Orlando Sequera: Another way to solve conflict is
Orlando Sequera: by forcing or directing. This is
Orlando Sequera: imposing one viewpoint at the expense of others. This is what we what that what is also known as a win-loop situations.
Orlando Sequera: It is needed sometimes.
Orlando Sequera: It's one way to self-conflict it's an ideal. No, because one side is going to feel that they lost
Orlando Sequera: but the best
Orlando Sequera: and the preferred way
Orlando Sequera: to solve problems. The best way to solve
Orlando Sequera: conflict
Orlando Sequera: is through collaboration and problem solving.
Orlando Sequera: because here you are getting
Orlando Sequera: several viewpoints and insights for multiple perspectives. But you're taking the time
Orlando Sequera: to have an open dialogue. I really understand the multiple perspectives and addressing you are taking into account the root cost of the problems. And you're looking for solutions that
Orlando Sequera: lead to consensus and commitment. This is long term. This is the preferred way to solve conflict, collaboration and problem solving. Okay, this like here, important for the exam, make sure that you're familiar with this multiple ways, it. But
Orlando Sequera: again.
Orlando Sequera: all of them are options.
Orlando Sequera: Pay attention to the scenario question to determine which one is the best option in that particular case. They're going to give you some hints that are associated with the best option. Again, my recommendation is, take practice questions. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: A
Orlando Sequera: another for broadcast.
Orlando Sequera: This. There is the 5 Y method technique which is
Orlando Sequera: a technique that was developed by a Japanese engineer at Toyota. And it's basically very simple. If you want to own, if you want to understand the root cause of a problem, you can ask the question
Orlando Sequera: Why? 5 times it's a rule of thumb. It might take more than 5, but it's around 5, and by asking the question 5 times, you're going to be able to uncover the root cost of a problem.
Orlando Sequera: All right. So super important conflict management for your Pmp. Exam. Make sure that you are familiar with this content that you are sharp when it comes to emotional intelligence, and when you, when it comes to serving leadership.
Orlando Sequera: and also when it comes to conflict management, those 3 topics are going to be on your Pmp. Exam.
Orlando Sequera: All right. So what have we covered so far? Conflict management huge for the Pmp. Exam. Please take practice questions. Please review this content Review. The replays watch the additional videos that we have
Orlando Sequera: in Per Cpio. Make sure that you are sharp when it comes to
Orlando Sequera: a conflict management. It is huge for the exam. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: We also went over, define team ground rules and also building a sure understanding.
Orlando Sequera: And now so
Orlando Sequera: we have come to the end of the content, and we have still some time to go over questions. Please
Orlando Sequera: a
Orlando Sequera: feel free to ask questions. We're gonna take the rest of the time. And one thing that I would like to ask. Please fill out the survey. Thank you so much, for the feedback feedback is always useful. The goal is
Orlando Sequera: for us to provide you with the best experience, so please feel free to ask questions. I am going to review the Q. A. And i'm going to be answering
Orlando Sequera: the questions that you have
Orlando Sequera: again one more time. Please do not forget to fill out the survey. We are not. Yes, you can do the survey now. But please stay logged in. Okay, we're still. We. We still have a few minutes that we're going to use
Orlando Sequera: and feel free to ask questions, and I am going to be a answering the questions.
Orlando Sequera: Starting with the once I have the most folks.
Orlando Sequera: there's a question in the Q. A.
Orlando Sequera: Who did you talk to? If one of the stakeholders is not a line aligning and causing too much disruption to your project. After you have talked multiple times with respect to stakeholder, great question.
Orlando Sequera: my advice will be, Talk to your project. Sponsor. Your product. Sponsor is usually someone that has
Orlando Sequera: a high level of authority, and they are vested in your project, talk to your sponsor, explain the situation, explain importantly, more properly, the efforts
Orlando Sequera: that you have that you have tried right. Don't. Don't go a make sure that they know that you're You're going to them because it's the last resort. So leverage your sponsor. If you're going through that situation
Orlando Sequera: that happens a lot
Orlando Sequera: slide 139. There was a test prep question. And what is the best way to measure training outcomes
Orlando Sequera: the answers included post-training performance assessments for strain surveys and measuring increased team velocity. The right answer was measuring and increasing velocity. I would
Orlando Sequera: I would love to expand, but I need the context of the question there, and they are not trying to be
Orlando Sequera: I'm not trying to be mean, or anything, or or dismissed the question. But
Orlando Sequera: there is. You can have a long question, but it's gonna be one word. And this is my advice for the Pmp. Exam. Read the questions carefully, because there's one word that can change the entire.
Orlando Sequera: the entire the entire question. So you might be thinking initially that they're asking you something.
Orlando Sequera: But
Orlando Sequera: there is a word at the end a key word that can change the entire question, and you might be getting the run assumption. So read the questions carefully. You need to have the the context of the question. Pmi is notorious for that.
Orlando Sequera: all right.
Orlando Sequera: what else?
Orlando Sequera: Another question. Why do we not have a conflict management plan like. We have plans for other important areas of the project. Well, it's not a specific area of your project, but you have comfortable resolution techniques and
Orlando Sequera: You have
Orlando Sequera: the tools to address it, because it's not necessary in the area. It's not an area of your project. It's something that is going to happen because you're working with other people. That's why it's not necessarily an area of your project.
Orlando Sequera: That's why we don't have a plan for that.
Orlando Sequera: there's another coming in. The chat. Orlando, obviously agile and waterful approaches have press and cons absolutely. The P. And I have spoken with advice, choosing either agile or whatever, and steering clear of hybrid, because they believe hybrid, and elicits the negative aspects of both. No, I disagree with that statement.
Orlando Sequera: I think actually that most organizations use some type of hybrid.
Orlando Sequera: And
Orlando Sequera: no, I I I disagree with that statement. Honestly. I don't think that hybrid brings the negative aspects of both. Actually, the opposite in my experience is the opposite
Orlando Sequera: A. But
Orlando Sequera: in deciding which approach is best, pay attention to the scope. Scope is king, as I mentioned. Are you working with scope that is really complex. Or is the team very familiar with the scope like building a one-story house in a construction company. So that'll be my my recommendation.
Orlando Sequera: Hmm.
Orlando Sequera: Can I review the 3 areas again?
Orlando Sequera: You gotta be more specific. I don't know what 3 areas we have.
Orlando Sequera: We have been carrying multiple areas.
Orlando Sequera: Can you elaborate more than negotiations that collaboration activity world You're going to be engaging with other people for communication is negotiation about the work that it's been done about contracts and agreements with suppliers, so negotiation is going to be
Orlando Sequera: It's going to be a constant in your project.
Orlando Sequera: When does Hr. Get involved in conflict management. When When the conflict becomes dysfunctional, anything above the level level, 2 in the scale, the least scale.
Orlando Sequera: It's a you need to get Hr. Involved when it becomes this functional conflict, then by that I mean when it's taken to a personal level.
Orlando Sequera: it seem applicable to adaptive. Yes.
Orlando Sequera: Oh.
Orlando Sequera: There is a lot of coverage on the people. Domain or aspect are this restricted?
Orlando Sequera: Are this restricted? If
Orlando Sequera: i'm sorry
Orlando Sequera: there's a lot of coverage on the people aspect are this restricted If the organization is functional week matrix. No. This applicable to any type of organization you're working with people.
Orlando Sequera: The organizations have formed by people.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: how can us P. And Foster bear collaboration will first you to figure out what type of organization you're working with. But it's applicable to any organization.
Orlando Sequera: If it's a functional with matrix, you have to use leadership. You have no authority or very low authority. Then team building activities through leadership serve a leadership.
Orlando Sequera: That will be the answer
Orlando Sequera: regarding the weather in the desert representing on planned risk.
Orlando Sequera: we're in the Pmp process, if anywhere. That's a referred to basic steps in a more bullet point form
Orlando Sequera: It's that's not how it works. We have. We have the tools and techniques, but we have to learn how to use them. They're not going to give you a clear. Oh, go here! No.
Orlando Sequera: no, we we have to learn that covering the content when in that situation, would you escalate the unplanned risk as an issue that has affected the critical path? Well, first of all, if feed of
Orlando Sequera: only if it's, if it affects the critical path, may or may not affect. The risk may or may not affect the critical path, but you have to
Orlando Sequera: You you have to address. You have to escalate right away, because to address this risk you have to check the risk management plan
Orlando Sequera: for starters. That step number one, and you have to use management reserves because you didn't account for this risk. You didn't plan for this, major grain in the middle of the desert. Right.
Orlando Sequera: So you have to
Orlando Sequera: a escalate the issue. Ask for permission to use management reserves, and that's how you address it.
Orlando Sequera: from a Pmp. Mindset. What is the ideal meaning length that it depends on the topic. It depends on the project. It depends on what you're trying to do. There's not a set formula for meeting duration. No, it can be an hour. It can be 2 h. It really depends. But my recommendation is as if your team members are asking you
Orlando Sequera: to get clarification. For example, they're trying to understand a little bit more of a requirement. Ask, ask them, is this something complex? Can we do it in half an hour. Can we do it in an hour? Ask them so I ha ask questions right? But it changes this sort of saved
Orlando Sequera: a formula for that?
Orlando Sequera: What is the best training approach for long-term organization benefits
Orlando Sequera: a all of them. Work, I mean, do you have to figure out which one works best depend. It depends on the budget. It depends on the type of industry. It depends on the
Orlando Sequera: multiple factors. I mean it's kind of hard to to say with, it depends on your specific situation.
Orlando Sequera: Another question.
Orlando Sequera: Can skill frame opportunities be through? That's incentive for team members to strive for? Absolutely. Absolutely. Yeah, you. That's a nice positive spin.
Orlando Sequera: a
there.
Orlando Sequera: What about conflict due to authority of a team member?
Orlando Sequera: Well, the answer is the racy matrix, right? So in in. We are as a as a team. We are the same. Ideally, we are the same level. So
Orlando Sequera: that is
Orlando Sequera: something that we have to to keep in mind.
Orlando Sequera: What is the difference between compromise and
Orlando Sequera: i'm sorry. Let me go back.
Orlando Sequera: What is the difference between compromise and collaboration? Compromise is short-term collaboration is long-term, and it
Orlando Sequera: takes into account the root cause of the problem.
Orlando Sequera: Is there a default role, a person who can become the product sponsor? It's usually someone
Orlando Sequera: a in up management that is going to be vested in the project is is vested in the same set. They want to make sure that this project is successful.
Orlando Sequera: You don't need to look for a sponsor. It's gonna be assigned when the project is in the genesis process. It's not up to you to find the sponsor. No, someone's going to be in the organization a project champion or a project sponsor that's going to happen in in the in the organization so.
Orlando Sequera: but it's not up to you as a Pm. To look for a sponsor.
Orlando Sequera: A.
Orlando Sequera: Would you be able to do a wrap up on top tips. I'm trying to do that. But yeah, hopefully, we have time. That's my goal to have a wrap up.
Orlando Sequera: Yes, I
Orlando Sequera: I will do a wrap up and final tips for
Orlando Sequera: for the exam as much as possible.
Orlando Sequera: Oh, 3 areas Emotional intelligence. That's one of them. Serve a leadership conflict, resolution.
Orlando Sequera: a
Orlando Sequera: key aspects
Orlando Sequera: for the exam.
Orlando Sequera: How do we handle politics among team members? Well.
Orlando Sequera: understanding that some enterprise, environmental factor, address that team, building, build, trust by building trust and team building activities. Build Trust with your team members.
Orlando Sequera: Another question is it wise to determine if a resource will be a good fit for the team personality wise
Orlando Sequera: in the interview. Yes, for agile teams
Orlando Sequera: they want to be involved in that process. Agile teams they like to be involved in that process. They're self-organized and self-managed, and they can.
Orlando Sequera: They're usually part of the interviewing process when the when we're bringing a new team member so it's
Orlando Sequera: it. It. Yeah, it is the short answer to that question is, Yes.
Orlando Sequera: through racy
Orlando Sequera: verify work, scope, or in of individual, whoever it.
Orlando Sequera: What a Pm. Can do If any employee refused to view config or clear the visual responsibility. As well refer to the team charter and the ground rules and the racing.
Orlando Sequera: That's why you created that.
Orlando Sequera: to begin with, to you, you need to use it to address that situation. If they don't want to follow that, then they are gonna be, is their
Orlando Sequera: it's their problem.
Orlando Sequera: Thanks.
Orlando Sequera: How is disruption
Orlando Sequera: and
Orlando Sequera: innovation connected? Well.
Orlando Sequera: changes, right changes can be disruptive. But if you are working in a psychologically safe environment
Orlando Sequera: team members are going to feel confident enough to share.
Orlando Sequera: and their ideas, and sometimes they can be disruptive. They're changing, proposing to change
Orlando Sequera: the way we are handling
Orlando Sequera: something. So
Orlando Sequera: that's what we that's how change
Orlando Sequera: a disruption and innovation are
Orlando Sequera: are linked.
Orlando Sequera: Please fill out the survey before you leave, for today.
Orlando Sequera: We only have a few more minutes, and remember, this is a scale. If you like it a lot
Orlando Sequera: 10, if not at all likely, then
Orlando Sequera: They lower numbers.
Orlando Sequera: and please also remember to review
Orlando Sequera: the actual
Orlando Sequera: slides for vocabulary. Those are important as well. Those are really important. Those are really important.
Orlando Sequera: and we have the survey link at the very top of your
Orlando Sequera: Q. And a.
Orlando Sequera: Another question.
Orlando Sequera: What percentage of questions are mathematic and permanent?
Orlando Sequera: You not many questions formula related, if any at all. Not many questions.
Orlando Sequera: That's the Pm. Need to have map
Orlando Sequera: all the roles and tasks before making a race that you do that with a team. Yes, you do that with the team.
Orlando Sequera: So who's gonna be responsible for what? When you have the list of activities?
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: how do you handle political interference. Where do you have to elaborate that? A little bit more? Understand it? But make sure that you reinforce
Orlando Sequera: the team commitment and make sure that you build Trust
Orlando Sequera: with your team members.
Orlando Sequera: Hmm.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: What resource would you recommend more than others for the test? Prep aside the test? Prep. Learn practice Exam. Ping. I would recommend this content. This content that we're covering is, should be your go to source for
Orlando Sequera: your preparation efforts.
Orlando Sequera: These slides that we are covering
Orlando Sequera: how to deal with this situation. When you take over the the running project, and there is a conflict in the team, you do not know each other, but you need to tackle the situation quickly and gain for us. Rebuild the team to be able to move on.
Orlando Sequera: not necessary to rebuild I
Orlando Sequera: my apologies
Orlando Sequera: in that situation. I will talk to each team member individually, and try to understand
Orlando Sequera: a where, what is their position? That's what I will do in that situation?
Orlando Sequera: Is it the case that only stakeholders can request changes that is going to be defined in your scope Management plan? Who can request a change.
Orlando Sequera: And it could be a team member. It could be only stakeholders. But that's gonna be defined there.
Orlando Sequera: So whatever that's why we define the rules right? That's why we create the plans.
Orlando Sequera: So review the scope management plan.
Orlando Sequera: In some cases both can propose changes. Do you have to define who can create a change request.
Orlando Sequera: Okay.
Orlando Sequera: in the project status report to stakeholders we mentioned Project risk
Orlando Sequera: is that considered an escalation? No, that's considered as informing them of risk status.
Orlando Sequera: That's not escalation. You are informing them of your efforts. You're not escalating
Orlando Sequera: to them. You gotta keep them in form.
Orlando Sequera: If senior members are using
Orlando Sequera: their influence to negatively shape the project where the option of the Pm. Work. Again, work with your sponsor, work with your sponsor
Orlando Sequera: that's in the P. The product owner communicate up? No, they communicate down to with a team.
Orlando Sequera: That's it's actually deliation both ways upward and down work.
Orlando Sequera: How did you validate team member training or knowledge, sharing what successful? Well did they get the certifications that they needed? You can perform a post-test analysis on the competencies. They they learn about
Orlando Sequera: the new skill set. There are ways that you can that you can do that
Orlando Sequera: multiple ways that you can do that.
Orlando Sequera: What would you do with the tech like that, don't.
Orlando Sequera: if you feel, what would you do if the tech lead
Orlando Sequera: doesn't seem to listen and they don't. Listen! We'll talk to them, talk to them, talk to them, communicate, communicate.
Orlando Sequera: and make sure that they understand the urgency
Orlando Sequera: that they for them to listen, work with them, communicate, communicate, communicate.
Orlando Sequera: active listening. Is this the techniques of a technique about yourself or team members of stakeholders? It starts with you. But ideally you are modeling that behavior with your
Orlando Sequera: a team, members and your stakeholders
Orlando Sequera: is something more common in person, or visual, or visual or virtual teams, and your experience in both the happens in both regardless of
Orlando Sequera: a
Orlando Sequera: It can happen
Orlando Sequera: both ways.
Orlando Sequera: When do we have
Orlando Sequera: to involve Hr. In the conflict?
Orlando Sequera: Resolution, step when the conflict is this functional, and we cannot solve it through using this comfort. Resolution techniques that we cover today
Orlando Sequera: when it involves the separate sanctions. Usually when it's this functional comfort, conflict, situation is taken to
Orlando Sequera: they
Orlando Sequera: A is taken
Orlando Sequera: to a personal level.
Orlando Sequera: It's the first to say the formulas are not needed to memorize for the exam.
Orlando Sequera: Not necessarily.
Orlando Sequera: but what's really gone, what is important? And when we covered in value management tomorrow, it's going to make a little bit more sense. It's more about the interpretation than the former. It doesn't hurt.
Orlando Sequera: I'm going to say My opinion is it doesn't hurt, but it's not a must.
Orlando Sequera: But you need to know the interpretation of
Orlando Sequera: the metrics of those
Orlando Sequera: a different metrics that we're going to be using. Okay.
Orlando Sequera: Er.
Orlando Sequera: this is different from the answer. No test Prep: Well, again, we need to. We will have to review the question specifically. It's hard without the question.
Orlando Sequera: The questions are very specific.
Orlando Sequera: Do business analysts work frequently in projects? Yes.
Orlando Sequera: when do we use risk mitigation when we have when we're trying to
Orlando Sequera: respond to high probability, high impact risks?
Orlando Sequera: Would you recommend Taylor in personal study guides to the questions in practice exams.
Orlando Sequera: Not necessarily, not necessarily. I will.
Orlando Sequera: I would recommend
Orlando Sequera: to take practice questions, but
Orlando Sequera: a
Orlando Sequera: take as many as possible to get used to the type of to the type of questions, but they're not going to be exactly the same in the Pmp. Exam. They styled it's going to be similar, but it's not going to be exactly the same question.
Orlando Sequera: Perform sort analysis
Orlando Sequera: to understand your
Orlando Sequera: strings and weaknesses, and your opportunities and threats.
Orlando Sequera: so you can work on developing those witnesses. And with that we have come to the end of today's session.
Orlando Sequera: Thank you very much. Everyone.
Orlando Sequera: We'll do it again tomorrow.
Orlando Sequera: and we have.
Orlando Sequera: We're done with the session we have. We're officially done you. You are free to leave.
Orlando Sequera: and we'll do it again tomorrow. Thank you so much.
Orlando Sequera: and we'll see you all tomorrow. Thank you very much.
Orlando Sequera: Good night, Everyone.